
      The Idiot   
             by Fyodor Dostoyevsky
      Translated by Eva Martin
      PART I
      I.
   Towards the end of November, during a thaw, at nine o'clock one morning, a tr
ain on the Warsaw and Petersburg railway was approaching the latter city at full
 speed. The morning was so damp and misty that it was only with great difficulty
 that the day succeeded in breaking; and it was impossible to distinguish anythi
ng more than a few yards away from the carriage windows.
   Some of the passengers by this particular train were returning from abroad; b
ut the third-class carriages were the best filled, chiefly with insignificant pe
rsons of various occupations and degrees, picked up at the different stations ne
arer town. All of them seemed weary, and most of them had sleepy eyes and a shiv
ering expression, while their complexions generally appeared to have taken on th
e colour of the fog outside.
   When day dawned, two passengers in one of the third-class carriages found the
mselves opposite each other. Both were young fellows, both were rather poorly dr
essed, both had remarkable faces, and both were evidently anxious to start a con
versation.
   If they had but known why, at this particular moment, they were both remarkab
le persons, they would undoubtedly have wondered at the strange chance which had
 set them down opposite to one another in a third-class carriage of the Warsaw R
ailway Company.
   One of them was a young fellow of about twenty-seven, not tall, with black cu
rling hair, and small, grey, fiery eyes. His nose was broad and flat, and he had
 high cheek bones; his thin lips were constantly compressed into an impudent, ir
onical-it might almost be called a malicious-smile; but his forehead was high an
d well formed, and atoned for a good deal of the ugliness of the lower part of h
is face. A special feature of this physiognomy was its death-like pallor, which 
gave to the whole man an indescribably emaciated appearance in spite of his hard
 look, and at the same time a sort of passionate and suffering expression which 
did not harmonize with his impudent, sarcastic smile and keen, self-satisfied be
aring. He wore a large fur-or rather astrachan-overcoat, which had kept him warm
 all night, while his neighbour had been obliged to bear the full severity of a 
Russian November night entirely unprepared. His wide sleeveless mantle with a la
rge cape to it-the sort of cloak one sees upon travellers during the winter mont
hs in Switzerland or North Italy-was by no means adapted to the long cold journe
y through Russia, from Eydkuhnen to St. Petersburg.
   The wearer of this cloak was a young fellow, also of about twenty-six or twen
ty-seven years of age, slightly above the middle height, very fair, with a thin,
 pointed and very light coloured beard; his eyes were large and blue, and had an
 intent look about them, yet that heavy expression which some people affirm to b
e a peculiarity. as well as evidence, of an epileptic subject. His face was deci
dedly a pleasant one for all that; refined, but quite colourless, except for the
 circumstance that at this moment it was blue with cold. He held a bundle made u
p of an old faded silk handkerchief that apparently contained all his travelling
 wardrobe, and wore thick shoes and gaiters, his whole appearance being very un-
Russian.
   His black-haired neighbour inspected these peculiarities, having nothing bett
er to do, and at length remarked, with that rude enjoyment of the discomforts of
 others which the common classes so often show:
   "Cold?"
   "Very," said his neighbour, readily. "and this is a thaw, too.
   Fancy if it had been a hard frost! I never thought it would be so cold in the
 old country. I've grown quite out of the way of it."
   "What, been abroad, I suppose?"
   "Yes, straight from Switzerland."
   "Wheugh! my goodness!" The black-haired young fellow whistled, and then laugh
ed.
   The conversation proceeded. The readiness of the fair-haired young man in the
 cloak to answer all his opposite neighbour's questions was surprising. He seeme
d to have no suspicion of any impertinence or inappropriateness in the fact of s
uch questions being put to him. Replying to them, he made known to the inquirer 
that he certainly had been long absent from Russia, more than four years; that h
e had been sent abroad for his health; that he had suffered from some strange ne
rvous malady-a kind of epilepsy, with convulsive spasms. His interlocutor burst 
out laughing several times at his answers; and more than ever, when to the quest
ion, " whether he had been cured?" the patient replied:
   "No, they did not cure me."
   "Hey! that's it! You stumped up your money for nothing, and we believe in tho
se fellows, here!" remarked the black-haired individual, sarcastically.
   "Gospel truth, sir, Gospel truth!" exclaimed another passenger, a shabbily dr
essed man of about forty, who looked like a clerk, and possessed a red nose and 
a very blotchy face. "Gospel truth! All they do is to get hold of our good Russi
an money free, gratis, and for nothing. "
   "Oh, but you're quite wrong in my particular instance," said the Swiss patien
t, quietly. "Of course I can't argue the matter, because I know only my own case
; but my doctor gave me money-and he had very little-to pay my journey back, bes
ides having kept me at his own expense, while there, for nearly two years."
   "Why? Was there no one else to pay for you?" asked the blackhaired one.
   "No-Mr. Pavlicheff, who had been supporting me there, died a couple of years 
ago. I wrote to Mrs. General Epanchin at the time (she is a distant relative of 
mine), but she did not answer my letter. And so eventually I came back."
   "And where have you come to?"
   "That is-where am I going to stay? I-I really don't quite know yet, I-"
   Both the listeners laughed again.
   "I suppose your whole set-up is in that bundle, then?" asked the first.
   "I bet anything it is!" exclaimed the red-nosed passenger, with extreme satis
faction, "and that he has precious little in the luggage van!-though of course p
overty is no crime-we must remember that!"
   It appeared that it was indeed as they had surmised. The young fellow hastene
d to admit the fact with wonderful readiness.
   "Your bundle has some importance, however," continued the clerk, when they ha
d laughed their fill (it was observable that the subject of their mirth joined i
n the laughter when he saw them laughing); "for though I dare say it is not stuf
fed full of friedrichs d'or and louis d'or-judge from your costume and gaiters-s
till-if you can add to your possessions such a valuable property as a relation l
ike Mrs. General Epanchin, then your bundle becomes a significant object at once
. That is, of course, if you really are a relative of Mrs. Epanchin's, and have 
not made a little error through-well, absence of mind, which is very common to h
uman beings; or, say-through a too luxuriant fancy?"
   "Oh, you are right again," said the fair-haired traveller, "for I really am A
LMOST wrong when I say she and I are related. She is hardly a relation at all; s
o little, in fact, that I was not in the least surprised to have no answer to my
 letter. I expected as much."
   "H'm! you spent your postage for nothing, then. H'm! you are candid, however-
and that is commendable. H'm! Mrs. Epanchin-oh yes! a most eminent person. I kno
w her. As for Mr. Pavlicheff, who supported you in Switzerland, I know him too-a
t least, if it was Nicolai Andreevitch of that name? A fine fellow he was-and ha
d a property of four thousand souls in his day."
   "Yes, Nicolai Andreevitch-that was his name," and the young fellow looked ear
nestly and with curiosity at the all-knowing gentleman with the red nose.
   This sort of character is met with pretty frequently in a certain class. They
 are people who know everyone-that is, they know where a man is employed, what h
is salary is, whom he knows, whom he married, what money his wife had, who are h
is cousins, and second cousins, etc., etc. These men generally have about a hund
red pounds a year to live on, and they spend their whole time and talents in the
 amassing of this style of knowledge, which they reduce-or raise-to the standard
 of a science.
   During the latter part of the conversation the black-haired young man had bec
ome very impatient. He stared out of the window, and fidgeted, and evidently lon
ged for the end of the journey. He was very absent; he would appear to listen-an
d heard nothing; and he would laugh of a sudden, evidently with no idea of what 
he was laughing about.
   "Excuse me," said the red-nosed man to the young fellow with the bundle, rath
er suddenly; "whom have I the honour to be talking to?"
   "Prince Lef Nicolaievitch Muishkin," replied the latter, with perfect readine
ss.
   "Prince Muishkin? Lef Nicolaievitch? H'm! I don't know, I'm sure!
   I may say I have never heard of such a person," said the clerk, thoughtfully.
 "At least, the name, I admit, is historical.
   Karamsin must mention the family name, of course, in his history-but as an in
dividual-one never hears of any Prince Muishkin nowadays."
   "Of course not," replied the prince; "there are none, except myself. I believ
e I am the last and only one. As to my forefathers, they have always been a poor
 lot; my own father was a sublieutenant in the army. I don't know how Mrs. Epanc
hin comes into the Muishkin family, but she is descended from the Princess Muish
kin, and she, too, is the last of her line."
   "And did you learn science and all that, with your professor over there?" ask
ed the black-haired passenger.
   "Oh yes-I did learn a little, but-"
   "I've never learned anything whatever," said the other.
   "Oh, but I learned very little, you know!" added the prince, as though excusi
ng himself. "They could not teach me very much on account of my illness. "
   "Do you know the Rogojins?" asked his questioner, abruptly.
   "No, I don't-not at all! I hardly know anyone in Russia. Why, is that your na
me?"
   "Yes, I am Rogojin, Parfen Rogojin."
   "Parfen Rogojin? dear me-then don't you belong to those very Rogojins, perhap
s-" began the clerk, with a very perceptible increase of civility in his tone.
   "Yes-those very ones," interrupted Rogojin, impatiently, and with scant court
esy. I may remark that he had not once taken any notice of the blotchy-faced pas
senger, and had hitherto addressed all his remarks direct to the prince.
   "Dear me-is it possible?" observed the clerk, while his face assumed an expre
ssion of great deference and servility-if not of absolute alarm: "what, a son of
 that very Semen Rogojin-hereditary honourable citizen-who died a month or so ag
o and left two million and a half of roubles?"
   "And how do YOU know that he left two million and a half of roubles?" asked R
ogojin, disdainfully, and no deigning so much as to look at the other. "However,
 it's true enough that my father died a month ago, and that here am I returning 
from Pskoff, a month after, with hardly a boot to my foot. They've treated me li
ke a dog! I've been ill of fever at Pskoff the whole time, and not a line, nor f
arthing of money, have I received from my mother or my confounded brother!"
   "And now you'll have a million roubles, at least-goodness gracious me!" excla
imed the clerk, rubbing his hands.
   "Five weeks since, I was just like yourself," continued Rogojin, addressing t
he prince, "with nothing but a bundle and the clothes I wore. I ran away from my
 father and came to Pskoff to my aunt's house, where I caved in at once with fev
er, and he went and died while I was away. All honour to my respected father's m
emory-but he uncommonly nearly killed me, all the same. Give you my word, prince
, if I hadn't cut and run then, when I did, he'd have murdered me like a dog."
   "I suppose you angered him somehow?" asked the prince, looking at the million
aire with considerable curiosity But though there may have been something remark
able in the fact that this man was heir to millions of roubles there was somethi
ng about him which surprised and interested the prince more than that. Rogojin, 
too, seemed to have taken up the conversation with unusual alacrity it appeared 
that he was still in a considerable state of excitement, if not absolutely fever
ish, and was in real need of someone to talk to for the mere sake of talking, as
 safety-valve to his agitation.
   As for his red-nosed neighbour, the latter-since the information as to the id
entity of Rogojin-hung over him, seemed to be living on the honey of his words a
nd in the breath of his nostrils, catching at every syllable as though it were a
 pearl of great price.
   "Oh, yes; I angered him-I certainly did anger him," replied Rogojin. "But wha
t puts me out so is my brother. Of course my mother couldn't do anything-she's t
oo old-and whatever brother Senka says is law for her! But why couldn't he let m
e know? He sent a telegram, they say. What's the good of a telegram? It frighten
ed my aunt so that she sent it back to the office unopened, and there it's been 
ever since! It's only thanks to Konief that I heard at all; he wrote me all abou
t it. He says my brother cut off the gold tassels from my father's coffin, at ni
ght because they're worth a lot of money!' says he. Why, I can get him sent off 
to Siberia for that alone, if I like; it's sacrilege. Here, you-scarecrow!" he a
dded, addressing the clerk at his side, "is it sacrilege or not, by law?' "Sacri
lege, certainly-certainly sacrilege," said the latter.
   "And it's Siberia for sacrilege, isn't it?"
   "Undoubtedly so; Siberia, of course!"
   "They will think that I'm still ill," continued Rogojin to the prince, "but I
 sloped off quietly, seedy as I was, took the train and came away. Aha, brother 
Senka, you'll have to open your gates and let me in, my boy! I know he told tale
s about me to my father-I know that well enough but I certainly did rile my fath
er about Nastasia Philipovna that's very sure, and that was my own doing."
   "Nastasia Philipovna?" said the clerk, as though trying to think out somethin
g.
   "Come, you know nothing about HER," said Rogojin, impatiently.
   "And supposing I do know something?" observed the other, triumphantly.
   "Bosh! there are plenty of Nastasia Philipovnas. And what an impertinent beas
t you are!" he added angrily. "I thought some creature like you would hang on to
 me as soon as I got hold of my money. "
   "Oh, but I do know, as it happens," said the clerk in an aggravating manner. 
"Lebedeff knows all about her. You are pleased to reproach me, your excellency, 
but what if I prove that I am right after all? Nastasia Phillpovna's family name
 is Barashkoff-I know, you see-and she is a very well known lady, indeed, and co
mes of a good family, too. She is connected with one Totski, Afanasy Ivanovitch,
 a man of considerable property, a director of companies, and so on, and a great
 friend of General Epanchin, who is interested in the same matters as he is."
   "My eyes!" said Rogojin, really surprised at last. "The devil take the fellow
, how does he know that?"
   "Why, he knows everything-Lebedeff knows everything! I was a month or two wit
h Lihachof after his father died, your excellency, and while he was knocking abo
ut-he's in the debtor's prison now-I was with him, and he couldn't do a thing wi
thout Lebedeff; and I got to know Nastasia Philipovna and several people at that
 time."
   "Nastasia Philipovna? Why, you don't mean to say that she and Lihachof-" crie
d Rogojin, turning quite pale.
   "No, no, no, no, no! Nothing of the sort, I assure you!" said Lebedeff, hasti
ly. "Oh dear no, not for the world! Totski's the only man with any chance there.
 Oh, no! He takes her to his box at the opera at the French theatre of an evenin
g, and the officers and people all look at her and say, 'By Jove, there's the fa
mous Nastasia Philipovna!' but no one ever gets any further than that, for there
 is nothing more to say."
   "Yes, it's quite true," said Rogojin, frowning gloomily; "so Zaleshoff told m
e. I was walking about the Nefsky one fine day, prince, in my father's old coat,
 when she suddenly came out of a shop and stepped into her carriage. I swear I w
as all of a blaze at once. Then I met Zaleshoff-looking like a hair-dresser's as
sistant, got up as fine as I don't know who, while I looked like a tinker. 'Don'
t flatter yourself, my boy,' said he; 'she's not for such as you; she's a prince
ss, she is, and her name is Nastasia Philipovna Barashkoff, and she lives with T
otski, who wishes to get rid of her because he's growing rather old-fiftyfive or
 so-and wants to marry a certain beauty, the loveliest woman in all Petersburg.'
 And then he told me that I could see Nastasia Philipovna at the opera-house tha
t evening, if I liked, and described which was her box. Well, I'd like to see my
 father allowing any of us to go to the theatre; he'd sooner have killed us, any
 day. However, I went for an hour or so and saw Nastasia Philipovna, and I never
 slept a wink all night after. Next morning my father happened to give me two go
vernment loan bonds to sell, worth nearly five thousand roubles each. 'Sell them
,' said he, 'and then take seven thousand five hundred roubles to the office, gi
ve them to the cashier, and bring me back the rest of the ten thousand, without 
looking in anywhere on the way; look sharp, I shall be waiting for you.' Well, I
 sold the bonds, but I didn't take the seven thousand roubles to the office; I w
ent straight to the English shop and chose a pair of earrings, with a diamond th
e size of a nut in each. They cost four hundred roubles more than I had, so I ga
ve my name, and they trusted me. With the earrings I went at once to Zaleshoff's
. 'Come on!' I said, 'come on to Nastasia Philipovna's,' and off we went without
 more ado. I tell you I hadn't a notion of what was about me or before me or bel
ow my feet all the way; I saw nothing whatever. We went straight into her drawin
g-room, and then she came out to us.
   "I didn't say right out who I was, but Zaleshoff said: 'From Parfen Rogojin, 
in memory of his first meeting with you yesterday; be so kind as to accept these
!' "She opened the parcel, looked at the earrings, and laughed.
   "'Thank your friend Mr. Rogojin for his kind attention,' says she, and bowed 
and went off. Why didn't I die there on the spot?
   The worst of it all was, though, that the beast Zaleshoff got all the credit 
of it! I was short and abominably dressed, and stood and stared in her face and 
never said a word, because I was shy, like an ass! And there was he all in the f
ashion, pomaded and dressed out, with a smart tie on, bowing and scraping; and I
 bet anything she took him for me all the while!
   "'Look here now,' I said, when we came out, 'none of your interference here a
fter this-do you understand?' He laughed: 'And how are you going to settle up wi
th your father?' says he. I thought I might as well jump into the Neva at once w
ithout going home first; but it struck me that I wouldn't, after all, and I went
 home feeling like one of the damned."
   "My goodness!" shivered the clerk. "And his father," he added, for the prince
's instruction, "and his father would have given a man a ticket to the other wor
ld for ten roubles any day-not to speak of ten thousand!"
   The prince observed Rogojin with great curiosity; he seemed paler than ever a
t this moment.
   "What do you know about it?" cried the latter. "Well, my father learned the w
hole story at once, and Zaleshoff blabbed it all over the town besides. So he to
ok me upstairs and locked me up, and swore at me for an hour. 'This is only a fo
retaste,' says he; 'wait a bit till night comes, and I'll come back and talk to 
you again.' "Well, what do you think? The old fellow went straight off to Nastas
ia Philipovna, touched the floor with his forehead, and began blubbering and bes
eeching her on his knees to give him back the diamonds. So after awhile she brou
ght the box and flew out at him. 'There,' she says, 'take your earrings, you wre
tched old miser; although they are ten times dearer than their value to me now t
hat I know what it must have cost Parfen to get them! Give Parfen my compliments
,' she says, 'and thank him very much!'
   Well, I meanwhile had borrowed twenty-five roubles from a friend, and off I w
ent to Pskoff to my aunt's. The old woman there lectured me so that I left the h
ouse and went on a drinking tour round the public-houses of the place. I was in 
a high fever when I got to Pskoff, and by nightfall I was lying delirious in the
 streets somewhere or other!"
   "Oho! we'll make Nastasia Philipovna sing another song now!" giggled Lebedeff
, rubbing his hands with glee. "Hey, my boy, we'll get her some proper earrings 
now! We'll get her such earrings that-"
   "Look here," cried Rogojin, seizing him fiercely by the arm,
   "look here, if you so much as name Nastasia Philipovna again, I'll tan your h
ide as sure as you sit there!"
   "Aha! do-by all means! if you tan my hide you won't turn me away from your so
ciety. You'll bind me to you, with your lash, for ever. Ha, ha! here we are at t
he station, though."
   Sure enough, the train was just steaming in as he spoke.
   Though Rogojin had declared that he left Pskoff secretly, a large collection 
of friends had assembled to greet him, and did so with profuse waving of hats an
d shouting.
   "Why, there's Zaleshoff here, too!" he muttered, gazing at the scene with a s
ort of triumphant but unpleasant smile. Then he suddenly turned to the prince: "
Prince, I don't know why I have taken a fancy to you; perhaps because I met you 
just when I did.
   But no, it can't be that, for I met this fellow " (nodding at Lebedeff) "too,
 and I have not taken a fancy to him by any means.
   Come to see me, prince; we'll take off those gaiters of yours and dress you u
p in a smart fur coat, the best we can buy. You shall have a dress coat, best qu
ality, white waistcoat, anything you like, and your pocket shall be full of mone
y. Come, and you shall go with me to Nastasia Philipovna's. Now then will you co
me or no?"
   "Accept, accept, Prince Lef Nicolaievitch" said Lebedef solemnly;
   "don't let it slip! Accept, quick!"
   Prince Muishkin rose and stretched out his hand courteously, while he replied
 with some cordiality:
   "I will come with the greatest pleasure, and thank you very much for taking a
 fancy to me. I dare say I may even come today if I have time, for I tell you fr
ankly that I like you very much too.
   I liked you especially when you told us about the diamond earrings; but I lik
ed you before that as well, though you have such a dark-clouded sort of face. Th
anks very much for the offer of clothes and a fur coat; I certainly shall requir
e both clothes and coat very soon. As for money, I have hardly a copeck about me
 at this moment."
   "You shall have lots of money; by the evening I shall have plenty; so come al
ong!"
   "That's true enough, he'll have lots before evening!" put in Lebedeff.
   "But, look here, are you a great hand with the ladies? Let's know that first?
" asked Rogojin.
   "Oh no, oh no! said the prince; "I couldn't, you know-my illness-I hardly eve
r saw a soul."
   "H'm! well-here, you fellow-you can come along with me now if you like!" crie
d Rogojin to Lebedeff, and so they all left the carriage.
   Lebedeff had his desire. He went off with the noisy group of Rogojin's friend
s towards the Voznesensky, while the prince's route lay towards the Litaynaya. I
t was damp and wet. The prince asked his way of passers-by, and finding that he 
was a couple of miles or so from his destination, he determined to take a droshk
y.
      II.
   General Epanchin lived in his own house near the Litaynaya.
   Besides this large residence-five-sixths of which was let in flats and lodgin
gs-the general was owner of another enormous house in the Sadovaya bringing in e
ven more rent than the first.
   Besides these houses he had a delightful little estate just out of town, and 
some sort of factory in another part of the city.
   General Epanchin, as everyone knew, had a good deal to do with certain govern
ment monopolies; he was also a voice, and an important one, in many rich public 
companies of various descriptions; in fact, he enjoyed the reputation of being a
 wellto-do man of busy habits, many ties, and affluent means. He had made himsel
f indispensable in several quarters, amongst others in his department of the gov
ernment; and yet it was a known fact that Fedor Ivanovitch Epanchin was a man of
 no education whatever, and had absolutely risen from the ranks.
   This last fact could, of course, reflect nothing but credit upon the general;
 and yet, though unquestionably a sagacious man, he had his own little weaknesse
s-very excusable ones,-one of which was a dislike to any allusion to the above c
ircumstance. He was undoubtedly clever. For instance, he made a point of never a
sserting himself when he would gain more by keeping in the background; and in co
nsequence many exalted personages valued him principally for his humility and si
mplicity, and because "he knew his place." And yet if these good people could on
ly have had a peep into the mind of this excellent fellow who "knew his place" s
o well! The fact is that, in spite of his knowledge of the world and his really 
remarkable abilities, he always liked to appear to be carrying out other people'
s ideas rather than his own. And also, his luck seldom failed him, even at cards
, for which he had a passion that he did not attempt to conceal. He played for h
igh stakes, and moved, altogether, in very varied society.
   As to age, General Epanchin was in the very prime of life; that is, about fif
ty-five years of age,-the flowering time of existence, when real enjoyment of li
fe begins. His healthy appearance, good colour, sound, though discoloured teeth,
 sturdy figure, preoccupied air during business hours, and jolly good humour dur
ing his game at cards in the evening, all bore witness to his success in life, a
nd combined to make existence a bed of roses to his excellency. The general was 
lord of a flourishing family, consisting of his wife and three grown-up daughter
s. He had married young, while still a lieutenant, his wife being a girl of abou
t his own age, who possessed neither beauty nor education, and who brought him n
o more than fifty souls of landed property, which little estate served, however,
 as a nest-egg for far more important accumulations. The general never regretted
 his early marriage, or regarded it as a foolish youthful escapade; and he so re
spected and feared his wife that he was very near loving her. Mrs. Epanchin came
 of the princely stock of Muishkin, which if not a brilliant, was, at all events
, a decidedly ancient family; and she was extremely proud of her descent.
   With a few exceptions, the worthy couple had lived through their long union v
ery happily. While still young the wife had been able to make important friends 
among the aristocracy, partly by virtue of her family descent, and partly by her
 own exertions; while, in after life, thanks to their wealth and to the position
 of her husband in the service, she took her place among the higher circles as b
y right.
   During these last few years all three of the general's daughtersAlexandra, Ad
elaida, and Aglaya-had grown up and matured. Of course they were only Epanchins,
 but their mother's family was noble; they might expect considerable fortunes; t
heir father had hopes of attaining to very high rank indeed in his country's ser
vice-all of which was satisfactory. All three of the girls were decidedly pretty
, even the eldest, Alexandra, who was just twenty-five years old. The middle dau
ghter was now twenty-three, while the youngest, Aglaya, was twenty. This younges
t girl was absolutely a beauty, and had begun of late to attract considerable at
tention in society. But this was not all, for every one of the three was clever,
 well educated, and accomplished.
   It was a matter of general knowledge that the three girls were very fond of o
ne another, and supported each other in every way; it was even said that the two
 elder ones had made certain sacrifices for the sake of the idol of the househol
d, Aglaya. In society they not only disliked asserting themselves, but were actu
ally retiring. Certainly no one could blame them for being too arrogant or haugh
ty, and yet everybody was well aware that they were proud and quite understood t
heir own value. The eldest was musical, while the second was a clever artist, wh
ich fact she had concealed until lately. In a word, the world spoke well of the 
girls; but they were not without their enemies, and occasionally people talked w
ith horror of the number of books they had read.
   They were in no hurry to marry. They liked good society, but were not too kee
n about it. All this was the more remarkable, because everyone was well aware of
 the hopes and aims of their parents.
   It was about eleven o'clock in the forenoon when the prince rang the bell at 
General Epanchin's door. The general lived on the first floor or flat of the hou
se, as modest a lodging as his position permitted. A liveried servant opened the
 door, and the prince was obliged to enter into long explanations with this gent
leman, who, from the first glance, looked at him and his bundle with grave suspi
cion. At last, however, on the repeated positive assurance that he really was Pr
ince Muishkin, and must absolutely see the general on business, the bewildered d
omestic showed him into a little ante-chamber leading to a waiting-room that adj
oined the general's study, there handing him over to another servant, whose duty
 it was to be in this ante-chamber all the morning, and announce visitors to the
 general. This second individual wore a dress coat, and was some forty years of 
age; he was the general's special study servant, and well aware of his own impor
tance.
   "Wait in the next room, please; and leave your bundle here," said the door-ke
eper, as he sat down comfortably in his own easy-chair in the ante-chamber. He l
ooked at the prince in severe surprise as the latter settled himself in another 
chair alongside, with his bundle on his knees.
   "If you don't mind, I would rather sit here with you," said the prince; "I sh
ould prefer it to sitting in there."
   "Oh, but you can't stay here. You are a visitor-a guest, so to speak. Is it t
he general himself you wish to see?"
   The man evidently could not take in the idea of such a shabbylooking visitor,
 and had decided to ask once more.
   "Yes-I have business-" began the prince.
   "I do not ask you what your business may be, all I have to do is to announce 
you; and unless the secretary comes in here I cannot do that."
   The man's suspicions seemed to increase more and more. The prince was too unl
ike the usual run of daily visitors; and although the general certainly did rece
ive, on business, all sorts and conditions of men, yet in spite of this fact the
 servant felt great doubts on the subject of this particular visitor. The presen
ce of the secretary as an intermediary was, he judged, essential in this case.
   "Surely you-are from abroad?" he inquired at last, in a confused sort of way.
 He had begun his sentence intending to say, "Surely you are not Prince Muishkin
, are you?"
   "Yes, straight from the train! Did not you intend to say, 'Surely you are not
 Prince Muishkin?' just now, but refrained out of politeness?"
   "H'm!" grunted the astonished servant.
   "I assure you I am not deceiving you; you shall not have to answer for me. As
 to my being dressed like this, and carrying a bundle, there's nothing surprisin
g in that-the fact is, my circumstances are not particularly rosy at this moment
."
   "H'm!-no, I'm not afraid of that, you see; I have to announce you, that's all
. The secretary will be out directly-that is, unless you-yes, that's the rub-unl
ess you-come, you must allow me to ask you-you've not come to beg, have you?"
   "Oh dear no, you can be perfectly easy on that score. I have quite another ma
tter on hand."
   "You must excuse my asking, you know. Your appearance led me to think-but jus
t wait for the secretary; the general is busy now, but the secretary is sure to 
come out."
   "Oh-well, look here, if I have some time to wait, would you mind telling me, 
is there any place about where I could have a smoke?
   I have my pipe and tobacco with me."
   "SMOKE?" said the man, in shocked but disdainful surprise, blinking his eyes 
at the prince as though he could not believe his senses." No, sir, you cannot sm
oke here, and I wonder you are not ashamed of the very suggestion. Ha, ha! a coo
l idea that, I declare!"
   "Oh, I didn't mean in this room! I know I can't smoke here, of course. I'd ad
journ to some other room, wherever you like to show me to. You see, I'm used to 
smoking a good deal, and now I haven't had a puff for three hours; however, just
 as you like."
   "Now how on earth am I to announce a man like that?" muttered the servant. "I
n the first place, you've no right in here at all; you ought to be in the waitin
g-room, because you're a sort of visitor-a guest, in fact-and I shall catch it f
or this. Look here, do you intend to take up you abode with us?" he added, glanc
ing once more at the prince's bundle, which evidently gave him no peace.
   "No, I don't think so. I don't think I should stay even if they were to invit
e me. I've simply come to make their acquaintance, and nothing more."
   "Make their acquaintance?" asked the man, in amazement, and with redoubled su
spicion. "Then why did you say you had business with the general?"
   "Oh well, very little business. There is one little matter-some advice I am g
oing to ask him for; but my principal object is simply to introduce myself, beca
use I am Prince Muishkin, and Madame Epanchin is the last of her branch of the h
ouse, and besides herself and me there are no other Muishkins left."
   "What-you're a relation then, are you?" asked the servant, so bewildered that
 he began to feel quite alarmed.
   "Well, hardly so. If you stretch a point, we are relations, of course, but so
 distant that one cannot really take cognizance of it. I once wrote to your mist
ress from abroad, but she did not reply. However, I have thought it right to mak
e acquaintance with her on my arrival. I am telling you all this in order to eas
e your mind, for I see you are still far from comfortable on my account. All you
 have to do is to announce me as Prince Muishkin, and the object of my visit wil
l be plain enough. If I am received-very good; if not, well, very good again. Bu
t they are sure to receive me, I should think; Madame Epanchin will naturally be
 curious to see the only remaining representative of her family. She values her 
Muishkin descent very highly, if I am rightly informed."
   The prince's conversation was artless and confiding to a degree, and the serv
ant could not help feeling that as from visitor to common serving-man this state
 of things was highly improper. His conclusion was that one of two things must b
e the explanation-either that this was a begging impostor, or that the prince, i
f prince he were, was simply a fool, without the slightest ambition; for a sensi
ble prince with any ambition would certainly not wait about in ante-rooms with s
ervants, and talk of his own private affairs like this. In either case, how was 
he to announce this singular visitor?
   "I really think I must request you to step into the next room!" he said, with
 all the insistence he could muster.
   "Why? If I had been sitting there now, I should not have had the opportunity 
of making these personal explanations. I see you are still uneasy about me and k
eep eyeing my cloak and bundle. Don't you think you might go in yourself now, wi
thout waiting for the secretary to come out?"
   "No, no! I can't announce a visitor like yourself without the secretary. Besi
des the general said he was not to be disturbed-he is with the Colonel C-. Gavri
la Ardalionovitch goes in without announcing."
   "Who may that be? a clerk?"
   "What? Gavrila Ardalionovitch? Oh no; he belongs to one of the companies. Loo
k here, at all events put your bundle down, here."
   "Yes, I will if I may; and-can I take off my cloak"
   "Of course; you can't go in THERE with it on, anyhow."
   The prince rose and took off his mantle, revealing a neat enough morning cost
ume-a little worn, but well made. He wore a steel watch chain and from this chai
n there hung a silver Geneva watch.
   Fool the prince might be, still, the general's servant felt that it was not c
orrect for him to continue to converse thus with a visitor, in spite of the fact
 that the prince pleased him somehow.
   "And what time of day does the lady receive?" the latter asked, reseating him
self in his old place.
   "Oh, that's not in my province! I believe she receives at any time; it depend
s upon the visitors. The dressmaker goes in at eleven. Gavrila Ardalionovitch is
 allowed much earlier than other people, too; he is even admitted to early lunch
 now and then."
   "It is much warmer in the rooms here than it is abroad at this season," obser
ved the prince; " but it is much warmer there out of doors. As for the houses-a 
Russian can't live in them in the winter until he gets accustomed to them."
   "Don't they heat them at all?"
   "Well, they do heat them a little; but the houses and stoves are so different
 to ours."
   "H'm! were you long away?"
   "Four years! and I was in the same place nearly all the time,-in one village.
"
   "You must have forgotten Russia, hadn't you?"
   "Yes, indeed I had-a good deal; and, would you believe it, I often wonder at 
myself for not having forgotten how to speak Russian? Even now, as I talk to you
, I keep saying to myself 'how well I am speaking it.' Perhaps that is partly wh
y I am so talkative this morning. I assure you, ever since yesterday evening I h
ave had the strongest desire to go on and on talking Russian."
   "H'm! yes; did you live in Petersburg in former years?"
   This good flunkey, in spite of his conscientious scruples, really could not r
esist continuing such a very genteel and agreeable conversation.
   "In Petersburg? Oh no! hardly at all, and now they say so much is changed in 
the place that even those who did know it well are obliged to relearn what they 
knew. They talk a good deal about the new law courts, and changes there, don't t
hey?"
   "H'm! yes, that's true enough. Well now, how is the law over there, do they a
dminister it more justly than here?"
   "Oh, I don't know about that! I've heard much that is good about our legal ad
ministration, too. There is no capital punishment here for one thing."
   "Is there over there?"
   "Yes-I saw an execution in France-at Lyons. Schneider took me over with him t
o see it."
   "What, did they hang the fellow?"
   "No, they cut off people's heads in France."
   "What did the fellow do?-yell?"
   "Oh no-it's the work of an instant. They put a man inside a frame and a sort 
of broad knife falls by machinery -they call the thing a guillotine-it falls wit
h fearful force and weight-the head springs off so quickly that you can't wink y
our eye in between. But all the preparations are so dreadful. When they announce
 the sentence, you know, and prepare the criminal and tie his hands, and cart hi
m off to the scaffold-that's the fearful part of the business. The people all cr
owd round-even womenthough they don't at all approve of women looking on."
   "No, it's not a thing for women."
   "Of course not-of course not!-bah! The criminal was a fine intelligent fearle
ss man; Le Gros was his name; and I may tell you-believe it or not, as you like-
that when that man stepped upon the scaffold he CRIED, he did indeed,-he was as 
white as a bit of paper. Isn't it a dreadful idea that he should have cried -cri
ed! Whoever heard of a grown man crying from fear-not a child, but a man who nev
er had cried before-a grown man of forty-five years. Imagine what must have been
 going on in that man's mind at such a moment; what dreadful convulsions his who
le spirit must have endured; it is an outrage on the soul that's what it is. Bec
ause it is said 'thou shalt not kill,' is he to be killed because he murdered so
me one else? No, it is not right, it's an impossible theory. I assure you, I saw
 the sight a month ago and it's dancing before my eyes to this moment. I dream o
f it, often."
   The prince had grown animated as he spoke, and a tinge of colour suffused his
 pale face, though his way of talking was as quiet as ever. The servant followed
 his words with sympathetic interest.
   Clearly he was not at all anxious to bring the conversation to an end. Who kn
ows? Perhaps he too was a man of imagination and with some capacity for thought.
   "Well, at all events it is a good thing that there's no pain when the poor fe
llow's head flies off," he remarked.
   "Do you know, though," cried the prince warmly, "you made that remark now, an
d everyone says the same thing, and the machine is designed with the purpose of 
avoiding pain, this guillotine I mean; but a thought came into my head then: wha
t if it be a bad plan after all? You may laugh at my idea, perhaps-but I could n
ot help its occurring to me all the same. Now with the rack and tortures and so 
on-you suffer terrible pain of course; but then your torture is bodily pain only
 (although no doubt you have plenty of that) until you die. But HERE I should im
agine the most terrible part of the whole punishment is, not the bodily pain at 
all-but the certain knowledge that in an hour,-then in ten minutes, then in half
 a minute, then now-this very INSTANT-your soul must quit your body and that you
 will no longer be a man-and that this is certain, CERTAIN! That's the point-the
 certainty of it. Just that instant when you place your head on the block and he
ar the iron grate over your head-then-that quarter of a second is the most awful
 of all.
   "This is not my own fantastical opinion-many people have thought the same; bu
t I feel it so deeply that I'll tell you what I think. I believe that to execute
 a man for murder is to punish him immeasurably more dreadfully than is equivale
nt to his crime.
   A murder by sentence is far more dreadful than a murder committed by a crimin
al. The man who is attacked by robbers at night, in a dark wood, or anywhere, un
doubtedly hopes and hopes that he may yet escape until the very moment of his de
ath. There are plenty of instances of a man running away, or imploring for mercy
-at all events hoping on in some degree-even after his throat was cut. But in th
e case of an execution, that last hope-having which it is so immeasurably less d
readful to die,-is taken away from the wretch and CERTAINTY substituted in its p
lace! There is his sentence, and with it that terrible certainty that he cannot 
possibly escape death-which, I consider, must be the most dreadful anguish in th
e world. You may place a soldier before a cannon's mouth in battle, and fire upo
n him-and he will still hope. But read to that same soldier his death-sentence, 
and he will either go mad or burst into tears. Who dares to say that any man can
 suffer this without going mad? No, no! it is an abuse, a shame, it is unnecessa
ry-why should such a thing exist?
   Doubtless there may be men who have been sentenced, who have suffered this me
ntal anguish for a while and then have been reprieved; perhaps such men may have
 been able to relate their feelings afterwards. Our Lord Christ spoke of this an
guish and dread. No! no! no! No man should be treated so, no man, no man!"
   The servant, though of course he could not have expressed all this as the pri
nce did, still clearly entered into it and was greatly conciliated, as was evide
nt from the increased amiability of his expression. "If you are really very anxi
ous for a smoke," he remarked, "I think it might possibly be managed, if you are
 very quick about it. You see they might come out and inquire for you, and you w
ouldn't be on the spot. You see that door there? Go in there and you'll find a l
ittle room on the right; you can smoke there, only open the window, because I ou
ght not to allow it really, and-." But there was no time, after all.
   A young fellow entered the ante-room at this moment, with a bundle of papers 
in his hand. The footman hastened to help him take off his overcoat. The new arr
ival glanced at the prince out of the corners of his eyes.
   "This gentleman declares, Gavrila Ardalionovitch," began the man, confidentia
lly and almost familiarly, "that he is Prince Muishkin and a relative of Madame 
Epanchin's. He has just arrived from abroad, with nothing but a bundle by way of
 luggage-."
   The prince did not hear the rest, because at this point the servant continued
 his communication in a whisper.
   Gavrila Ardalionovitch listened attentively, and gazed at the prince with gre
at curiosity. At last he motioned the man aside and stepped hurriedly towards th
e prince.
   "Are you Prince Muishkin?" he asked, with the greatest courtesy and amiabilit
y.
   He was a remarkably handsome young fellow of some twenty-eight summers, fair 
and of middle height; he wore a small beard, and his face was most intelligent. 
Yet his smile, in spite of its sweetness, was a little thin, if I may so call it
, and showed his teeth too evenly; his gaze though decidedly good-humoured and i
ngenuous, was a trifle too inquisitive and intent to be altogether agreeable.
   "Probably when he is alone he looks quite different, and hardly smiles at all
!" thought the prince.
   He explained about himself in a few words, very much the same as he had told 
the footman and Rogojin beforehand.
   Gavrila Ardalionovitch meanwhile seemed to be trying to recall something.
   "Was it not you, then, who sent a letter a year or less ago-from Switzerland,
 I think it was-to Elizabetha Prokofievna (Mrs.
   Epanchin)?"
   "It was."
   "Oh, then, of course they will remember who you are. You wish to see the gene
ral? I'll tell him at once-he will be free in a minute; but you-you had better w
ait in the ante-chamber,-hadn't you? Why is he here?" he added, severely, to the
 man.
   "I tell you, sir, he wished it himself!"
   At this moment the study door opened, and a military man, with a portfolio un
der his arm, came out talking loudly, and after bidding good-bye to someone insi
de, took his departure.
   "You there, Gania? cried a voice from the study, "come in here, will you?"
   Gavrila Ardalionovitch nodded to the prince and entered the room hastily.
   A couple of minutes later the door opened again and the affable voice of Gani
a cried:
   "Come in please, prince!"
      III.
   General Ivan Fedorovitch Epanchin was standing In the middle of the room, and
 gazed with great curiosity at the prince as he entered. He even advanced a coup
le of steps to meet him.
   The prince came forward and introduced himself.
   "Quite so," replied the general, "and what can I do for you?"
   "Oh, I have no special business; my principal object was to make your acquain
tance. I should not like to disturb you. I do not know your times and arrangemen
ts here, you see, but I have only just arrived. I came straight from the station
. I am come direct from Switzerland."
   The general very nearly smiled, but thought better of it and kept his smile b
ack. Then he reflected, blinked his eyes, stared at his guest once more from hea
d to foot; then abruptly motioned him to a chair, sat down himself, and waited w
ith some impatience for the prince to speak.
   Gania stood at his table in the far corner of the room, turning over papers.
   "I have not much time for making acquaintances, as a rule," said the general,
 "but as, of course, you have your object in coming,I-"
   "I felt sure you would think I had some object in view when I resolved to pay
 you this visit," the prince interrupted; "but I give you my word, beyond the pl
easure of making your acquaintance I had no personal object whatever."
   "The pleasure is, of course, mutual; but life is not all pleasure, as you are
 aware. There is such a thing as business, and I really do not see what possible
 reason there can be, or what we have in common to-"
   "Oh, there is no reason, of course, and I suppose there is nothing in common 
between us, or very little; for if I am Prince Muishkin, and your wife happens t
o be a member of my house, that can hardly be called a 'reason.' I quite underst
and that. And yet that was my whole motive for coming. You see I have not been i
n Russia for four years, and knew very little about anything when I left. I had 
been very ill for a long time, and I feel now the need of a few good friends. In
 fact, I have a certain question upon which I much need advice, and do not know 
whom to go to for it. I thought of your family when I was passing through Berlin
.
   'They are almost relations,' I said to myself,' so I'll begin with them; perh
aps we may get on with each other, I with them and they with me, if they are kin
d people;' and I have heard that you are very kind people!"
   "Oh, thank you, thank you, I'm sure," replied the general, considerably taken
 aback. "May I ask where you have taken up your quarters?"
   "Nowhere, as yet."
   "What, straight from the station to my house? And how about your luggage?"
   "I only had a small bundle, containing linen, with me, nothing more. I can ca
rry it in my hand, easily. There will be plenty of time to take a room in some h
otel by the evening."
   "Oh, then you DO intend to take a room?"
   "Of course."
   "To judge from your words, you came straight to my house with the intention o
f staying there."
   "That could only have been on your invitation. I confess, however, that I sho
uld not have stayed here even if you had invited me, not for any particular reas
on, but because it is-well, contrary to my practice and nature, somehow."
   "Oh, indeed! Then it is perhaps as well that I neither DID invite you, nor DO
 invite you now. Excuse me, prince, but we had better make this matter clear, on
ce for all. We have just agreed that with regard to our relationship there is no
t much to be said, though, of course, it would have been very delightful to us t
o feel that such relationship did actually exist; therefore, perhaps-"
   "Therefore, perhaps I had better get up and go away?" said the prince, laughi
ng merrily as he rose from his place; just as merrily as though the circumstance
s were by no means strained or difficult. "And I give you my word, general, that
 though I know nothing whatever of manners and customs of society, and how peopl
e live and all that, yet I felt quite sure that this visit of mine would end exa
ctly as it has ended now. Oh, well, I suppose it's all right; especially as my l
etter was not answered.
   Well, good-bye, and forgive me for having disturbed you!"
   The prince's expression was so good-natured at this moment, and so entirely f
ree from even a suspicion of unpleasant feeling was the smile with which he look
ed at the general as he spoke, that the latter suddenly paused, and appeared to 
gaze at his guest from quite a new point of view, all in an instant.
   "Do you know, prince," he said, in quite a different tone, "I do not know you
 at all, yet, and after all, Elizabetha Prokofievna would very likely be pleased
 to have a peep at a man of her own name. Wait a little, if you don't mind, and 
if you have time to spare?"
   "Oh, I assure you I've lots of time, my time is entirely my own!"
   And the prince immediately replaced his soft, round hat on the table. "I conf
ess, I thought Elizabetha Prokofievna would very likely remember that I had writ
ten her a letter. Just now your servant-outside there-was dreadfully suspicious 
that I had come to beg of you. I noticed that! Probably he has very strict instr
uctions on that score; but I assure you I did not come to beg. I came to make so
me friends. But I am rather bothered at having disturbed you; that's all I care 
about.-"
   "Look here, prince," said the general, with a cordial smile, "if you really a
re the sort of man you appear to be, it may be a source of great pleasure to us 
to make your better acquaintance; but, you see, I am a very busy man, and have t
o be perpetually sitting here and signing papers, or off to see his excellency, 
or to my department, or somewhere; so that though I should be glad to see more o
f people, nice people-you see, I-however, I am sure you are so well brought up t
hat you will see at once, and-but how old are you, prince?"
   "Twenty-six."
   "No? I thought you very much younger."
   "Yes, they say I have a 'young' face. As to disturbing you I shall soon learn
 to avoid doing that, for I hate disturbing people. Besides, you and I are so di
fferently constituted, I should think, that there must be very little in common 
between us. Not that I will ever believe there is NOTHING in common between any 
two people, as some declare is the case. I am sure people make a great mistake i
n sorting each other into groups, by appearances; but I am boring you, I see, yo
u-"
   "Just two words: have you any means at all? Or perhaps you may be intending t
o undertake some sort of employment? Excuse my questioning you, but-"
   "Oh, my dear sir, I esteem and understand your kindness in putting the questi
on. No; at present I have no means whatever, and no employment either, but I hop
e to find some. I was living on other people abroad. Schneider, the professor wh
o treated me and taught me, too, in Switzerland, gave me just enough money for m
y journey, so that now I have but a few copecks left. There certainly is one que
stion upon which I am anxious to have advice, but-"
   "Tell me, how do you intend to live now, and what are your plans?" interrupte
d the general.
   "I wish to work, somehow or other."
   "Oh yes, but then, you see, you are a philosopher. Have you any talents, or a
bility in any direction-that is, any that would bring in money and bread? Excuse
 me again-"
   "Oh, don't apologize. No, I don't think I have either talents or special abil
ities of any kind; on the contrary. I have always been an invalid and unable to 
learn much. As for bread, I should think-"
   The general interrupted once more with questions; while the prince again repl
ied with the narrative we have heard before. It appeared that the general had kn
own Pavlicheff; but why the latter had taken an interest in the prince, that you
ng gentleman could not explain; probably by virtue of the old friendship with hi
s father, he thought.
   The prince had been left an orphan when quite a little child, and Pavlicheff 
had entrusted him to an old lady, a relative of his own, living in the country, 
the child needing the fresh air and exercise of country life. He was educated, f
irst by a governess, and afterwards by a tutor, but could not remember much abou
t this time of his life. His fits were so frequent then, that they made almost a
n idiot of him (the prince used the expression "idiot" himself). Pavlicheff had 
met Professor Schneider in Berlin, and the latter had persuaded him to send the 
boy to Switzerland, to Schneider's establishment there, for the cure of his epil
epsy, and, five years before this time, the prince was sent off. But Pavlicheff 
had died two or three years since, and Schneider had himself supported the young
 fellow, from that day to this, at his own expense. Although he had not quite cu
red him, he had greatly improved his condition; and now, at last, at the prince'
s own desire, and because of a certain matter which came to the ears of the latt
er, Schneider had despatched the young man to Russia.
   The general was much astonished.
   "Then you have no one, absolutely NO one in Russia?" he asked.
   "No one, at present; but I hope to make friends; and then I have a letter fro
m-"
   "At all events," put in the general, not listening to the news about the lett
er, "at all events, you must have learned SOMETHING, and your malady would not p
revent your undertaking some easy work, in one of the departments, for instance?
   "Oh dear no, oh no! As for a situation, I should much like to find one for I 
am anxious to discover what I really am fit for. I have learned a good deal in t
he last four years, and, besides, I read a great many Russian books."
   "Russian books, indeed? Then, of course, you can read and write quite correct
ly?"
   "Oh dear, yes!"
   "Capital! And your handwriting?"
   "Ah, there I am REALLY talented! I may say l am a real caligraphist. Let me w
rite you something, just to show you," said the prince, with some excitement.
   "With pleasure! In fact, it is very necessary. I like your readiness, prince;
 in fact, I must say-I-I-like you very well, altogether," said the general.
   "What delightful writing materials you have here, such a lot of pencils and t
hings, and what beautiful paper! It's a charming room altogether. I know that pi
cture, it's a Swiss view. I'm sure the artist painted it from nature, and that I
 have seen the very place-"
   "Quite likely, though I bought it here. Gania, give the prince some paper. He
re are pens and paper; now then, take this table.
   What's this?" the general continued to Gania, who had that moment taken a lar
ge photograph out of his portfolio, and shown it to his senior. "Halloa! Nastasi
a Philipovna! Did she send it you herself? Herself?" he inquired, with much curi
osity and great animation.
   "She gave it me just now, when I called in to congratulate her. I asked her f
or it long ago. I don't know whether she meant it for a hint that I had come emp
ty-handed, without a present for her birthday, or what," added Gania, with an un
pleasant smile.
   "Oh, nonsense, nonsense," said the general, with decision. " What extraordina
ry ideas you have, Gania! As if she would hint; that's not her way at all. Besid
es, what could you give her, without having thousands at your disposal? You migh
t have given her your portrait, however. Has she ever asked you for it?"
   "No, not yet. Very likely she never will. I suppose you haven't forgotten abo
ut tonight, have you, Ivan Fedorovitch? You were one of those specially invited,
 you know."
   "Oh no, I remember all right, and I shall go, of course. I should think so! S
he's twenty-five years old today! And, you know, Gania, you must be ready for gr
eat things; she has promised both myself and Afanasy Ivanovitch that she will gi
ve a decided answer tonight, yes or no. So be prepared!"
   Gania suddenly became so ill at ease that his face grew paler than ever.
   "Are you sure she said that?" he asked, and his voice seemed to quiver as he 
spoke.
   "Yes, she promised. We both worried her so that she gave in; but she wished u
s to tell you nothing about it until the day. "
   The general watched Gania's confusion intently, and clearly did not like it.
   "Remember, Ivan Fedorovitch," said Gania, in great agitation,
   "that I was to be free too, until her decision; and that even then I was to h
ave my 'yes or no' free."
   "Why, don't you, aren't you-" began the general, in alarm.
   "Oh, don't misunderstand-"
   "But, my dear fellow, what are you doing, what do you mean?"
   "Oh, I'm not rejecting her. I may have expressed myself badly, but I didn't m
ean that."
   "Reject her! I should think not!" said the general with annoyance, and appare
ntly not in the least anxious to conceal it.
   "Why, my dear fellow, it's not a question of your rejecting her, it is whethe
r you are prepared to receive her consent joyfully, and with proper satisfaction
. How are things going on at home?"
   "At home? Oh, I can do as I like there, of course; only my father will make a
 fool of himself, as usual. He is rapidly becoming a general nuisance. I don't e
ver talk to him now, but I hold him in cheek, safe enough. I swear if it had not
 been for my mother, I should have shown him the way out, long ago. My mother is
 always crying, of course, and my sister sulks. I had to tell them at last that 
I intended to be master of my own destiny, and that I expect to be obeyed at hom
e. At least, I gave my sister to understand as much, and my mother was present."
   "Well, I must say, I cannot understand it!" said the general, shrugging his s
houlders and dropping his hands. "You remember your mother, Nina Alexandrovna, t
hat day she came and sat here and groaned-and when I asked her what was the matt
er, she says, 'Oh, it's such a DISHONOUR to us!' dishonour! Stuff and nonsense!
   I should like to know who can reproach Nastasia Philipovna, or who can say a 
word of any kind against her. Did she mean because Nastasia had been living with
 Totski? What nonsense it is! You would not let her come near your daughters, sa
ys Nina Alexandrovna. What next, I wonder? I don't see how she can fail to-to un
derstand-"
   "Her own position?" prompted Gania. "She does understand. Don't be annoyed wi
th her. I have warned her not to meddle in other people's affairs. However, alth
ough there's comparative peace at home at present, the storm will break if anyth
ing is finally settled tonight."
   The prince heard the whole of the foregoing conversation, as he sat at the ta
ble, writing. He finished at last, and brought the result of his labour to the g
eneral's desk.
   "So this is Nastasia Philipovna," he said, looking attentively and curiously 
at the portrait. "How wonderfully beautiful!" he immediately added, with warmth.
 The picture was certainly that of an unusually lovely woman. She was photograph
ed in a black silk dress of simple design, her hair was evidently dark and plain
ly arranged, her eyes were deep and thoughtful, the expression of her face passi
onate, but proud. She was rather thin, perhaps, and a little pale. Both Gania an
d the general gazed at the prince in amazement.
   "How do you know it's Nastasia Philipovna?" asked the general;
   "you surely don't know her already, do you? "
   "Yes, I do! I have only been one day in Russia, but I have heard of the great
 beauty!" And the prince proceeded to narrate his meeting with Rogojin in the tr
ain and the whole of the latter's story.
   "There's news!" said the general in some excitement, after listening to the s
tory with engrossed attention.
   "Oh, of course it's nothing but humbug!" cried Gania, a little disturbed, how
ever. "It's all humbug; the young merchant was pleased to indulge in a little in
nocent recreation! I have heard something of Rogojin!"
   "Yes, so have I!" replied the general. "Nastasia Philipovna told us all about
 the earrings that very day. But now it is quite a different matter. You see the
 fellow really has a million of roubles, and he is passionately in love. The who
le story smells of passion, and we all know what this class of gentry is capable
 of when infatuated. I am much afraid of some disagreeable scandal, I am indeed!
"
   "You are afraid of the million, I suppose," said Gania, grinning and showing 
his teeth.
   "And you are NOT, I presume, eh?"
   "How did he strike you, prince?" asked Gania, suddenly. "Did he seem to be a 
serious sort of a man, or just a common rowdy fellow? What was your own opinion 
about the matter?"
   While Gania put this question, a new idea suddenly flashed into his brain, an
d blazed out, impatiently, in his eyes. The general, who was really agitated and
 disturbed, looked at the prince too, but did not seem to expect much from his r
eply.
   "I really don't quite know how to tell you," replied the prince,
   "but it certainly did seem to me that the man was full of passion, and not, p
erhaps, quite healthy passion. He seemed to be still far from well. Very likely 
he will be in bed again in a day or two, especially if he lives fast."
   "No! do you think so?" said the general, catching at the idea.
   "Yes, I do think so!"
   "Yes, but the sort of scandal I referred to may happen at any moment. It may 
be this very evening," remarked Gania to the general, with a smile.
   "Of course; quite so. In that case it all depends upon what is going on in he
r brain at this moment."
   "You know the kind of person she is at times."
   "How? What kind of person is she?" cried the general, arrived at the limits o
f his patience. Look here, Gania, don't you go annoying her tonight What you are
 to do is to be as agreeable towards her as ever you can. Well, what are you smi
ling at? You must understand, Gania, that I have no interest whatever in speakin
g like this. Whichever way the question is settled, it will be to my advantage. 
Nothing will move Totski from his resolution, so I run no risk. If there is anyt
hing I desire, you must know that it is your benefit only. Can't you trust me? Y
ou are a sensible fellow, and I have been counting on you; for, in this matter, 
that, that-"
   "Yes, that's the chief thing," said Gania, helping the general out of his dif
ficulties again, and curling his lips in an envenomed smile, which he did not at
tempt to conceal. He gazed with his fevered eyes straight into those of the gene
ral, as though he were anxious that the latter might read his thoughts.
   The general grew purple with anger.
   "Yes, of course it is the chief thing!" he cried, looking sharply at Gania. "
What a very curious man you are, Gania! You actually seem to be GLAD to hear of 
this millionaire fellow's arrivaljust as though you wished for an excuse to get 
out of the whole thing. This is an affair in which you ought to act honestly wit
h both sides, and give due warning, to avoid compromising others. But, even now,
 there is still time. Do you understand me?
   I wish to know whether you desire this arrangement or whether you do not? If 
not, say so,-and-and welcome! No one is trying to force you into the snare, Gavr
ila Ardalionovitch, if you see a snare in the matter, at least."
   "I do desire it," murmured Gania, softly but firmly, lowering his eyes; and h
e relapsed into gloomy silence.
   The general was satisfied. He had excited himself, and was evidently now regr
etting that he had gone so far. He turned to the prince, and suddenly the disagr
eeable thought of the latter's presence struck him, and the certainty that he mu
st have heard every word of the conversation. But he felt at ease in another mom
ent; it only needed one glance at the prince to see that in that quarter there w
as nothing to fear.
   "Oh!" cried the general, catching sight of the prince's specimen of caligraph
y, which the latter had now handed him for inspection. "Why, this is simply beau
tiful; look at that, Gania, there's real talent there!"
   On a sheet of thick writing-paper the prince had written in medieval characte
rs the legend:
   "The gentle Abbot Pafnute signed this."
   "There," explained the prince, with great delight and animation,
   "there, that's the abbot's real signature-from a manuscript of the fourteenth
 century. All these old abbots and bishops used to write most beautifully, with 
such taste and so much care and diligence. Have you no copy of Pogodin, general?
 If you had one I could show you another type. Stop a bit-here you have the larg
e round writing common in France during the eighteenth century.
   Some of the letters are shaped quite differently from those now in use. It wa
s the writing current then, and employed by public writers generally. I copied t
his from one of them, and you can see how good it is. Look at the well-rounded a
 and d. I have tried to translate the French character into the Russian letters-
a difficult thing to do, but I think I have succeeded fairly.
   Here is a fine sentence, written in a good, original hand-'Zeal triumphs over
 all.' That is the script of the Russian War Office.
   That is how official documents addressed to important personages should be wr
itten. The letters are round, the type black, and the style somewhat remarkable.
 A stylist would not allow these ornaments, or attempts at flourishes-just look 
at these unfinished tails!-but it has distinction and really depicts the soul of
 the writer. He would like to give play to his imagination, and follow the inspi
ration of his genius, but a soldier is only at ease in the guard-room, and the p
en stops half-way, a slave to discipline. How delightful! The first time I met a
n example of this handwriting, I was positively astonished, and where do you thi
nk I chanced to find it? In Switzerland, of all places! Now that is an ordinary 
English hand.
   It can hardly be improved, it is so refined and exquisite-almost perfection. 
This is an example of another kind, a mixture of styles. The copy was given me b
y a French commercial traveller.
   It is founded on the English, but the downstrokes are a little blacker, and m
ore marked. Notice that the oval has some slight modification-it is more rounded
. This writing allows for flourishes; now a flourish is a dangerous thing! Its u
se requires such taste, but, if successful, what a distinction it gives to the w
hole! It results in an incomparable type-one to fall in love with!"
   "Dear me! How you have gone into all the refinements and details of the quest
ion! Why, my dear fellow, you are not a caligraphist, you are an artist! Eh, Gan
ia?"
   "Wonderful!" said Gania. "And he knows it too," he added, with a sarcastic sm
ile.
   "You may smile,-but there's a career in this," said the general.
   "You don't know what a great personage I shall show this to, prince. Why, you
 can command a situation at thirty-five roubles per month to start with. However
, it's half-past twelve," he concluded, looking at his watch; "so to business, p
rince, for I must be setting to work and shall not see you again today. Sit down
 a minute. I have told you that I cannot receive you myself very often, but I sh
ould like to be of some assistance to you, some small assistance, of a kind that
 would give you satisfaction. I shall find you a place in one of the State depar
tments, an easy place-but you will require to be accurate.
   Now, as to your plans-in the house, or rather in the family of Gania here-my 
young friend, whom I hope you will know better-his mother and sister have prepar
ed two or three rooms for lodgers, and let them to highly recommended young fell
ows, with board and attendance. I am sure Nina Alexandrovna will take you in on 
my recommendation. There you will be comfortable and well taken care of; for I d
o not think, prince, that you are the sort of man to be left to the mercy of Fat
e in a town like Petersburg. Nina Alexandrovna, Gania's mother, and Varvara Alex
androvna, are ladies for whom I have the highest possible esteem and respect.
   Nina Alexandrovna is the wife of General Ardalion Alexandrovitch, my old brot
her in arms, with whom, I regret to say, on account of certain circumstances, I 
am no longer acquainted. I give you all this information, prince, in order to ma
ke it clear to you that I am personally recommending you to this family, and tha
t in so doing, I am more or less taking upon myself to answer for you.
   The terms are most reasonable, and I trust that your salary will very shortly
 prove amply sufficient for your expenditure. Of course pocket-money is a necess
ity, if only a little; do not be angry, prince, if I strongly recommend you to a
void carrying money in your pocket. But as your purse is quite empty at the pres
ent moment, you must allow me to press these twenty-five roubles upon your accep
tance, as something to begin with. Of course we will settle this little matter a
nother time, and if you are the upright, honest man you look, I anticipate very 
little trouble between us on that score. Taking so much interest in you as you m
ay perceive I do, I am not without my object, and you shall know it in good time
. You see, I am perfectly candid with you. I hope, Gania, you have nothing to sa
y against the prince's taking up his abode in your house?"
   "Oh, on the contrary! my mother will be very glad," said Gania, courteously a
nd kindly.
   "I think only one of your rooms is engaged as yet, is it not?
   That fellow Ferd-Ferd-"
   "Ferdishenko."
   "Yes-I don't like that Ferdishenko. I can't understand why Nastasia Philipovn
a encourages him so. Is he really her cousin, as he says?"
   "Oh dear no, it's all a joke. No more cousin than I am."
   "Well, what do you think of the arrangement, prince?"
   "Thank you, general; you have behaved very kindly to me; all the more so sinc
e I did not ask you to help me. I don't say that out of pride. I certainly did n
ot know where to lay my head tonight.
   Rogojin asked me to come to his house, of course, but-"
   "Rogojin? No, no, my good fellow. I should strongly recommend you, paternally
,-or, if you prefer it, as a friend,-to forget all about Rogojin, and, in fact, 
to stick to the family into which you are about to enter."
   "Thank you," began the prince; "and since you are so very kind there is just 
one matter which I-"
   "You must really excuse me," interrupted the general, "but I positively haven
't another moment now. I shall just tell Elizabetha Prokofievna about you, and i
f she wishes to receive you at once-as I shall advise her-I strongly recommend y
ou to ingratiate yourself with her at the first opportunity, for my wife may be 
of the greatest service to you in many ways. If she cannot receive you now, you 
must be content to wait till another time. Meanwhile you, Gania, just look over 
these accounts, will you? We mustn't forget to finish off that matter-"
   The general left the room, and the prince never succeeded in broaching the bu
siness which he had on hand, though he had endeavoured to do so four times.
   Gania lit a cigarette and offered one to the prince. The latter accepted the 
offer, but did not talk, being unwilling to disturb Gania's work. He commenced t
o examine the study and its contents. But Gania hardly so much as glanced at the
 papers lying before him; he was absent and thoughtful, and his smile and genera
l appearance struck the prince still more disagreeably now that the two were lef
t alone together.
   Suddenly Gania approached our hero who was at the moment standing over Nastas
ia Philipovna's portrait, gazing at it.
   "Do you admire that sort of woman, prince?" he asked, looking intently at him
. He seemed to have some special object in the question.
   "It's a wonderful face," said the prince, "and I feel sure that her destiny i
s not by any means an ordinary, uneventful one. Her face is smiling enough, but 
she must have suffered terribly-hasn't she? Her eyes show it-those two bones the
re, the little points under her eyes, just where the cheek begins. It's a proud 
face too, terribly proud! And I-I can't say whether she is good and kind, or not
. Oh, if she be but good! That would make all well!"
   "And would you marry a woman like that, now?" continued Gania, never taking h
is excited eyes off the prince's face.
   "I cannot marry at all," said the latter. "I am an invalid."
   "Would Rogojin marry her, do you think?"
   "Why not? Certainly he would, I should think. He would marry her tomorrow!-ma
rry her tomorrow and murder her in a week!"
   Hardly had the prince uttered the last word when Gania gave such a fearful sh
udder that the prince almost cried out.
   "What's the matter?" said he, seizing Gania's hand.
   "Your highness! His excellency begs your presence in her excellency's apartme
nts!" announced the footman, appearing at the door.
   The prince immediately followed the man out of the room.
      IV.
   ALL three of the Miss Epanchins were fine, healthy girls, wellgrown, with goo
d shoulders and busts, and strong-almost masculine-hands; and, of course, with a
ll the above attributes, they enjoyed capital appetites, of which they were not 
in the least ashamed.
   Elizabetha Prokofievna sometimes informed the girls that they were a little t
oo candid in this matter, but in spite of their outward deference to their mothe
r these three young women, in solemn conclave, had long agreed to modify the unq
uestioning obedience which they had been in the habit of according to her; and M
rs. General Epanchin had judged it better to say nothing about it, though, of co
urse, she was well aware of the fact.
   It is true that her nature sometimes rebelled against these dictates of reaso
n, and that she grew yearly more capricious and impatient; but having a respectf
ul and well-disciplined husband under her thumb at all times, she found it possi
ble, as a rule, to empty any little accumulations of spleen upon his head, and t
herefore the harmony of the family was kept duly balanced, and things went as sm
oothly as family matters can.
   Mrs. Epanchin had a fair appetite herself, and generally took her share of th
e capital mid-day lunch which was always served for the girls, and which was nea
rly as good as a dinner. The young ladies used to have a cup of coffee each befo
re this meal, at ten o'clock, while still in bed. This was a favourite and unalt
erable arrangement with them. At half-past twelve, the table was laid in the sma
ll dining-room, and occasionally the general himself appeared at the family gath
ering, if he had time.
   Besides tea and coffee, cheese, honey, butter, pan-cakes of various kinds (th
e lady of the house loved these best), cutlets, and so on, there was generally s
trong beef soup, and other substantial delicacies.
   On the particular morning on which our story has opened, the family had assem
bled in the dining-room, and were waiting the general's appearance, the latter h
aving promised to come this day. If he had been one moment late, he would have b
een sent for at once; but he turned up punctually.
   As he came forward to wish his wife good-morning and kiss her hands, as his c
ustom was, he observed something in her look which boded ill. He thought he knew
 the reason, and had expected it, but still, he was not altogether comfortable. 
His daughters advanced to kiss him, too, and though they did not look exactly an
gry, there was something strange in their expression as well.
   The general was, owing to certain circumstances, a little inclined to be too 
suspicious at home, and needlessly nervous; but, as an experienced father and hu
sband, he judged it better to take measures at once to protect himself from any 
dangers there might be in the air.
   However, I hope I shall not interfere with the proper sequence of my narrativ
e too much, if I diverge for a moment at this point, in order to explain the mut
ual relations between General Epanchin's family and others acting a part in this
 history, at the time when we take up the thread of their destiny. I have alread
y stated that the general, though he was a man of lowly origin, and of poor educ
ation, was, for all that, an experienced and talented husband and father. Among 
other things, he considered it undesirable to hurry his daughters to the matrimo
nial altar and to worry them too much with assurances of his paternal wishes for
 their happiness, as is the custom among parents of many grown-up daughters. He 
even succeeded in ranging his wife on his side on this question, though he found
 the feat very difficult to accomplish, because unnatural; but the general's arg
uments were conclusive, and founded upon obvious facts. The general considered t
hat the girls' taste and good sense should be allowed to develop and mature deli
berately, and that the parents' duty should merely be to keep watch, in order th
at no strange or undesirable choice be made; but that the selection once effecte
d, both father and mother were bound from that moment to enter heart and soul in
to the cause, and to see that the matter progressed without hindrance until the 
altar should be happily reached.
   Besides this, it was clear that the Epanchins' position gained each year, wit
h geometrical accuracy, both as to financial solidity and social weight; and, th
erefore, the longer the girls waited, the better was their chance of making a br
illiant match.
   But again, amidst the incontrovertible facts just recorded, one more, equally
 significant, rose up to confront the family; and this was, that the eldest daug
hter, Alexandra, had imperceptibly arrived at her twenty-fifth birthday. Almost 
at the same moment, Afanasy Ivanovitch Totski, a man of immense wealth, high con
nections, and good standing, announced his intention of marrying. Afanasy Ivanov
itch was a gentleman of fifty-five years of age, artistically gifted, and of mos
t refined tastes. He wished to marry well, and, moreover, he was a keen admirer 
and judge of beauty.
   Now, since Totski had, of late, been upon terms of great cordiality with Epan
chin, which excellent relations were intensified by the fact that they were, so 
to speak, partners in several financial enterprises, it so happened that the for
mer now put in a friendly request to the general for counsel with regard to the 
important step he meditated. Might he suggest, for instance, such a thing as a m
arriage between himself and one of the general's daughters?
   Evidently the quiet, pleasant current of the family life of the Epanchins was
 about to undergo a change.
   The undoubted beauty of the family, par excellence, was the youngest, Aglaya,
 as aforesaid. But Totski himself, though an egotist of the extremest type, real
ized that he had no chance there; Aglaya was clearly not for such as he.
   Perhaps the sisterly love and friendship of the three girls had more or less 
exaggerated Aglaya's chances of happiness. In their opinion, the latter's destin
y was not merely to be very happy; she was to live in a heaven on earth. Aglaya'
s husband was to be a compendium of all the virtues, and of all success, not to 
speak of fabulous wealth. The two elder sisters had agreed that all was to be sa
crificed by them, if need be, for Aglaya's sake; her dowry was to be colossal an
d unprecedented.
   The general and his wife were aware of this agreement, and, therefore, when T
otski suggested himself for one of the sisters, the parents made no doubt that o
ne of the two elder girls would probably accept the offer, since Totski would ce
rtainly make no difficulty as to dowry. The general valued the proposal very hig
hly. He knew life, and realized what such an offer was worth.
   The answer of the sisters to the communication was, if not conclusive, at lea
st consoling and hopeful. It made known that the eldest, Alexandra, would very l
ikely be disposed to listen to a proposal.
   Alexandra was a good-natured girl, though she had a will of her own. She was 
intelligent and kind-hearted, and, if she were to marry Totski, she would make h
im a good wife. She did not care for a brilliant marriage; she was eminently a w
oman calculated to soothe and sweeten the life of any man; decidedly pretty, if 
not absolutely handsome. What better could Totski wish?
   So the matter crept slowly forward. The general and Totski had agreed to avoi
d any hasty and irrevocable step. Alexandra's parents had not even begun to talk
 to their daughters freely upon the subject, when suddenly, as it were, a disson
ant chord was struck amid the harmony of the proceedings. Mrs. Epanchin began to
 show signs of discontent, and that was a serious matter. A certain circumstance
 had crept in, a disagreeable and troublesome factor, which threatened to overtu
rn the whole business.
   This circumstance had come into existence eighteen years before.
   Close to an estate of Totski's, in one of the central provinces of Russia, th
ere lived, at that time, a poor gentleman whose estate was of the wretchedest de
scription. This gentleman was noted in the district for his persistent ill-fortu
ne; his name was Barashkoff, and, as regards family and descent, he was vastly s
uperior to Totski, but his estate was mortgaged to the last acre. One day, when 
he had ridden over to the town to see a creditor, the chief peasant of his villa
ge followed him shortly after, with the news that his house had been burnt down,
 and that his wife had perished with it, but his children were safe.
   Even Barashkoff, inured to the storms of evil fortune as he was, could not st
and this last stroke. He went mad and died shortly after in the town hospital. H
is estate was sold for the creditors; and the little girls-two of them, of seven
 and eight years of age respectively,-were adopted by Totski, who undertook thei
r maintenance and education in the kindness of his heart.
   They were brought up together with the children of his German bailiff. Very s
oon, however, there was only one of them leftNastasia Philipovna-for the other l
ittle one died of whoopingcough. Totski, who was living abroad at this time, ver
y soon forgot all about the child; but five years after, returning to Russia, it
 struck him that he would like to look over his estate and see how matters were 
going there, and, arrived at his bailiff's house, he was not long in discovering
 that among the children of the latter there now dwelt a most lovely little girl
 of twelve, sweet and intelligent, and bright, and promising to develop beauty o
f most unusual quality-as to which last Totski was an undoubted authority.
   He only stayed at his country scat a few days on this occasion, but he had ti
me to make his arrangements. Great changes took place in the child's education; 
a good governess was engaged, a Swiss lady of experience and culture. For four y
ears this lady resided in the house with little Nastia, and then the education w
as considered complete. The governess took her departure, and another lady came 
down to fetch Nastia, by Totski's instructions.
   The child was now transported to another of Totski's estates in a distant par
t of the country. Here she found a delightful little house, just built, and prep
ared for her reception with great care and taste; and here she took up her abode
 together with the lady who had accompanied her from her old home. In the house 
there were two experienced maids, musical instruments of all sorts, a charming "
young lady's library," pictures, paint-boxes, a lapdog, and everything to make l
ife agreeable. Within a fortnight Totski himself arrived, and from that time he 
appeared to have taken a great fancy to this part of the world and came down eac
h summer, staying two and three months at a time. So passed four years peacefull
y and happily, in charming surroundings.
   At the end of that time, and about four months after Totski's last visit (he 
had stayed but a fortnight on this occasion), a report reached Nastasia Philipov
na that he was about to be married in St. Petersburg, to a rich, eminent, and lo
vely woman.
   The report was only partially true, the marriage project being only in an emb
ryo condition; but a great change now came over Nastasia Philipovna. She suddenl
y displayed unusual decision of character; and without wasting time in thought, 
she left her country home and came up to St. Petersburg, straight to Totski's ho
use, all alone.
   The latter, amazed at her conduct, began to express his displeasure; but he v
ery soon became aware that he must change his voice, style, and everything else,
 with this young lady; the good old times were gone. An entirely new and differe
nt woman sat before him, between whom and the girl he had left in the country la
st July there seemed nothing in common.
   In the first place, this new woman understood a good deal more than was usual
 for young people of her age; so much indeed, that Totski could not help wonderi
ng where she had picked up her knowledge. Surely not from her "young lady's libr
ary"? It even embraced legal matters, and the "world" in general, to a considera
ble extent.
   Her character was absolutely changed. No more of the girlish alternations of 
timidity and petulance, the adorable naivete, the reveries, the tears, the playf
ulness It was an entirely new and hitherto unknown being who now sat and laughed 
at him, and informed him to his face that she had never had the faintest feeling
 for him of any kind, except loathing and contempt-contempt which had followed c
losely upon her sensations of surprise and bewilderment after her first acquaint
ance with him.
   This new woman gave him further to understand that though it was absolutely t
he same to her whom he married, yet she had decided to prevent this marriage-for
 no particular reason, but that she chose to do so, and because she wished to am
use herself at his expense for that it was "quite her turn to laugh a little now
!"
   Such were her words-very likely she did not give her real reason for this ecc
entric conduct; but, at all events, that was all the explanation she deigned to 
offer.
   Meanwhile, Totski thought the matter over as well as his scattered ideas woul
d permit. His meditations lasted a fortnight, however, and at the end of that ti
me his resolution was taken.
   The fact was, Totski was at that time a man of fifty years of age; his positi
on was solid and respectable; his place in society had long been firmly fixed up
on safe foundations; he loved himself, his personal comforts, and his position b
etter than all the world, as every respectable gentleman should!
   At the same time his grasp of things in general soon showed Totski that he no
w had to deal with a being who was outside the pale of the ordinary rules of tra
ditional behaviour, and who would not only threaten mischief but would undoubted
ly carry it out, and stop for no one.
   There was evidently, he concluded, something at work here; some storm of the 
mind, some paroxysm of romantic anger, goodness knows against whom or what, some
 insatiable contempt-in a word, something altogether absurd and impossible, but 
at the same time most dangerous to be met with by any respectable person with a 
position in society to keep up.
   For a man of Totski's wealth and standing, it would, of course, have been the
 simplest possible matter to take steps which would rid him at once from all ann
oyance; while it was obviously impossible for Nastasia Philipovna to harm him in
 any way, either legally or by stirring up a scandal, for, in case of the latter
 danger, he could so easily remove her to a sphere of safety.
   However, these arguments would only hold good in case of Nastasia acting as o
thers might in such an emergency. She was much more likely to overstep the bound
s of reasonable conduct by some extraordinary eccentricity.
   Here the sound judgment of Totski stood him in good stead. He realized that N
astasia Philipovna must be well aware that she could do nothing by legal means t
o injure him, and that her flashing eyes betrayed some entirely different intent
ion.
   Nastasia Philipovna was quite capable of ruining herself, and even of perpetr
ating something which would send her to Siberia, for the mere pleasure of injuri
ng a man for whom she had developed so inhuman a sense of loathing and contempt.
 He had sufficient insight to understand that she valued nothing in the world-he
rself least of all-and he made no attempt to conceal the fact that he was a cowa
rd in some respects. For instance, if he had been told that he would be stabbed 
at the altar, or publicly insulted, he would undoubtedly have been frightened; b
ut not so much at the idea of being murdered, or wounded, or insulted, as at the
 thought that if such things were to happen he would be made to look ridiculous 
in the eyes of society.
   He knew well that Nastasia thoroughly understood him and where to wound him a
nd how, and therefore, as the marriage was still only in embryo, Totski decided 
to conciliate her by giving it up. His decision was strengthened by the fact tha
t Nastasia Philipovna had curiously altered of late. It would be difficult to co
nceive how different she was physically, at the present time, to the girl of a f
ew years ago. She was pretty then but now!
   Totski laughed angrily when he thought how short-sighted he had been. In days
 gone by he remembered how he had looked at her beautiful eyes, how even then he
 had marvelled at their dark mysterious depths, and at their wondering gaze whic
h seemed to seek an answer to some unknown riddle. Her complexion also had alter
ed. She was now exceedingly pale, but, curiously, this change only made her more
 beautiful. Like most men of the world, Totski had rather despised such a cheapl
y-bought conquest, but of late years he had begun to think differently about it.
 It had struck him as long ago as last spring that he ought to be finding a good
 match for Nastasia; for instance, some respectable and reasonable young fellow 
serving in a government office in another part of the country. How maliciously N
astasia laughed at the idea of such a thing, now!
   However, it appeared to Totski that he might make use of her in another way; 
and he determined to establish her in St.
   Petersburg, surrounding her with all the comforts and luxuries that his wealt
h could command. In this way he might gain glory in certain circles.
   Five years of this Petersburg life went by, and, of course, during that time 
a great deal happened. Totski's position was very uncomfortable; having "funked"
 once, he could not totally regain his ease. He was afraid, he did not know why,
 but he was simply afraid of Nastasia Philipovna. For the first two years or so 
he had suspected that she wished to marry him herself, and that only her vanity 
prevented her telling him so. He thought that she wanted him to approach her wit
h a humble proposal from his own side, But to his great, and not entirely pleasu
rable amazement, he discovered that this was by no means the case, and that were
 he to offer himself he would be refused. He could not understand such a state o
f things, and was obliged to conclude that it was pride, the pride of an injured
 and imaginative woman, which had gone to such lengths that it preferred to sit 
and nurse its contempt and hatred in solitude rather than mount to heights of hi
therto unattainable splendour. To make matters worse, she was quite impervious t
o mercenary considerations, and could not be bribed in any way.
   Finally, Totski took cunning means to try to break his chains and be free. He
 tried to tempt her in various ways to lose her heart; he invited princes, hussa
rs, secretaries of embassies, poets, novelists, even Socialists, to see her; but
 not one of them all made the faintest impression upon Nastasia. It was as thoug
h she had a pebble in place of a heart, as though her feelings and affections we
re dried up and withered for ever.
   She lived almost entirely alone; she read, she studied, she loved music. Her 
principal acquaintances were poor women of various grades, a couple of actresses
, and the family of a poor schoolteacher. Among these people she was much belove
d.
   She received four or five friends sometimes, of an evening.
   Totski often came. Lately, too, General Epanchin had been enabled with great 
difficulty to introduce himself into her circle. Gania made her acquaintance als
o, and others were Ferdishenko, an illbred, and would-be witty, young clerk, and
 Ptitsin, a moneylender of modest and polished manners, who had risen from pover
ty. In fact, Nastasia Philipovna's beauty became a thing known to all the town; 
but not a single man could boast of anything more than his own admiration for he
r; and this reputation of hers, and her wit and culture and grace, all confirmed
 Totski in the plan he had now prepared.
   And it was at this moment that General Epanchin began to play so large and im
portant a part in the story.
   When Totski had approached the general with his request for friendly counsel 
as to a marriage with one of his daughters, he had made a full and candid confes
sion. He had said that he intended to stop at no means to obtain his freedom; ev
en if Nastasia were to promise to leave him entirely alone in future, he would n
ot (he said) believe and trust her; words were not enough for him; he must have 
solid guarantees of some sort. So he and the general determined to try what an a
ttempt to appeal to her heart would effect. Having arrived at Nastasia's house o
ne day, with Epanchin, Totski immediately began to speak of the intolerable torm
ent of his position. He admitted that he was to blame for all, but candidly conf
essed that he could not bring himself to feel any remorse for his original guilt
 towards herself, because he was a man of sensual passions which were inborn and
 ineradicable, and that he had no power over himself in this respect; but that h
e wished, seriously, to marry at last, and that the whole fate of the most desir
able social union which he contemplated, was in her hands; in a word, he confide
d his all to her generosity of heart.
   General Epanchin took up his part and spoke in the character of father of a f
amily; he spoke sensibly, and without wasting words over any attempt at sentimen
tality, he merely recorded his full admission of her right to be the arbiter of 
Totski's destiny at this moment. He then pointed out that the fate of his daught
er, and very likely of both his other daughters, now hung upon her reply.
   To Nastasia's question as to what they wished her to do, Totski confessed tha
t he had been so frightened by her, five years ago, that he could never now be e
ntirely comfortable until she herself married. He immediately added that such a 
suggestion from him would, of course, be absurd, unless accompanied by remarks o
f a more pointed nature. He very well knew, he said, that a certain young gentle
man of good family, namely, Gavrila Ardalionovitch Ivolgin, with whom she was ac
quainted, and whom she received at her house, had long loved her passionately, a
nd would give his life for some response from her. The young fellow had confesse
d this love of his to him (Totski) and had also admitted it in the hearing of hi
s benefactor, General Epanchin. Lastly, he could not help being of opinion that 
Nastasia must be aware of Gania's love for her, and if he (Totski) mistook not, 
she had looked with some favour upon it, being often lonely, and rather tired of
 her present life. Having remarked how difficult it was for him, of all people, 
to speak to her of these matters, Totski concluded by saying that he trusted Nas
tasia Philipovna would not look with contempt upon him if he now expressed his s
incere desire to guarantee her future by a gift of seventy-five thousand roubles
.
   He added that the sum would have been left her all the same in his will, and 
that therefore she must not consider the gift as in any way an indemnification t
o her for anything, but that there was no reason, after all, why a man should no
t be allowed to entertain a natural desire to lighten his conscience, etc., etc.
; in fact, all that would naturally be said under the circumstances.
   Totski was very eloquent all through, and, in conclusion, just touched on the
 fact that not a soul in the world, not even General Epanchin, had ever heard a 
word about the above seventy-five thousand roubles, and that this was the first 
time he had ever given expression to his intentions in respect to them.
   Nastasia Philipovna's reply to this long rigmarole astonished both the friend
s considerably.
   Not only was there no trace of her former irony, of her old hatred and enmity
, and of that dreadful laughter, the very recollection of which sent a cold chil
l down Totski's back to this very day; but she seemed charmed and really glad to
 have the opportunity of talking seriously with him for once in a way. She confe
ssed that she had long wished to have a frank and free conversation and to ask f
or friendly advice, but that pride had hitherto prevented her; now, however, tha
t the ice was broken, nothing could be more welcome to her than this opportunity
.
   First, with a sad smile, and then with a twinkle of merriment in her eyes, sh
e admitted that such a storm as that of five years ago was now quite out of the 
question. She said that she had long since changed her views of things, and reco
gnized that facts must be taken into consideration in spite of the feelings of t
he heart. What was done was done and ended, and she could not understand why Tot
ski should still feel alarmed.
   She next turned to General Epanchin and observed, most courteously, that she 
had long since known of his daughters, and that she had heard none but good repo
rt; that she had learned to think of them with deep and sincere respect. The ide
a alone that she could in any way serve them, would be to her both a pride and a
 source of real happiness.
   It was true that she was lonely in her present life; Totski had judged her th
oughts aright. She longed to rise, if not to love, at least to family life and n
ew hopes and objects, but as to Gavrila Ardalionovitch, she could not as yet say
 much. She thought it must be the case that he loved her; she felt that she too 
might learn to love him, if she could be sure of the firmness of his attachment 
to herself; but he was very young, and it was a difficult question to decide. Wh
at she specially liked about him was that he worked, and supported his family by
 his toil.
   She had heard that he was proud and ambitious; she had heard much that was in
teresting of his mother and sister, she had heard of them from Mr. Ptitsin, and 
would much like to make their acquaintance, but-another question!-would they lik
e to receive her into their house? At all events, though she did not reject the 
idea of this marriage, she desired not to be hurried. As for the seventy-five th
ousand roubles, Mr. Totski need not have found any difficulty or awkwardness abo
ut the matter; she quite understood the value of money, and would, of course, ac
cept the gift. She thanked him for his delicacy, however, but saw no reason why 
Gavrila Ardalionovitch should not know about it.
   She would not marry the latter, she said, until she felt persuaded that neith
er on his part nor on the part of his family did there exist any sort of conceal
ed suspicions as to herself.
   She did not intend to ask forgiveness for anything in the past, which fact sh
e desired to be known. She did not consider herself to blame for anything that h
ad happened in former years, and she thought that Gavrila Ardalionovitch should 
be informed as to the relations which had existed between herself and Totski dur
ing the last five years. If she accepted this money it was not to be considered 
as indemnification for her misfortune as a young girl, which had not been in any
 degree her own fault, but merely as compensation for her ruined life.
   She became so excited and agitated during all these explanations and confessi
ons that General Epanchin was highly gratified, and considered the matter satisf
actorily arranged once for all. But the once bitten Totski was twice shy, and lo
oked for hidden snakes among the flowers. However, the special point to which th
e two friends particularly trusted to bring about their object (namely, Gania's 
attractiveness for Nastasia Philipovna), stood out more and more prominently; th
e pourparlers had commenced, and gradually even Totski began to believe in the p
ossibility of success.
   Before long Nastasia and Gania had talked the matter over. Very little was sa
id-her modesty seemed to suffer under the infliction of discussing such a questi
on. But she recognized his love, on the understanding that she bound herself to 
nothing whatever, and that she reserved the right to say "no" up to the very hou
r of the marriage ceremony. Gania was to have the same right of refusal at the l
ast moment.
   It soon became clear to Gania, after scenes of wrath and quarrellings at the 
domestic hearth, that his family were seriously opposed to the match, and that N
astasia was aware of this fact was equally evident. She said nothing about it, t
hough he daily expected her to do so.
   There were several rumours afloat, before long, which upset Totski's equanimi
ty a good deal, but we will not now stop to describe them; merely mentioning an 
instance or two. One was that Nastasia had entered into close and secret relatio
ns with the Epanchin girls-a most unlikely rumour; another was that Nastasia had
 long satisfied herself of the fact that Gania was merely marrying her for money
, and that his nature was gloomy and greedy, impatient and selfish, to an extrao
rdinary degree; and that although he had been keen enough in his desire to achie
ve a conquest before, yet since the two friends had agreed to exploit his passio
n for their own purposes, it was clear enough that he had begun to consider the 
whole thing a nuisance and a nightmare.
   In his heart passion and hate seemed to hold divided sway, and although he ha
d at last given his consent to marry the woman (as he said), under the stress of
 circumstances, yet he promised himself that he would "take it out of her," afte
r marriage.
   Nastasia seemed to Totski to have divined all this, and to be preparing somet
hing on her own account, which frightened him to such an extent that he did not 
dare communicate his views even to the general. But at times he would pluck up h
is courage and be full of hope and good spirits again, acting, in fact, as weak 
men do act in such circumstances.
   However, both the friends felt that the thing looked rosy indeed when one day
 Nastasia informed them that she would give her final answer on the evening of h
er birthday, which anniversary was due in a very short time.
   A strange rumour began to circulate, meanwhile; no less than that the respect
able and highly respected General Epanchin was himself so fascinated by Nastasia
 Philipovna that his feeling for her amounted almost to passion. What he thought
 to gain by Gania's marriage to the girl it was difficult to imagine. Possibly h
e counted on Gania's complaisance; for Totski had long suspected that there exis
ted some secret understanding between the general and his secretary. At all even
ts the fact was known that he had prepared a magnificent present of pearls for N
astasia's birthday, and that he was looking forward to the occasion when he shou
ld present his gift with the greatest excitement and impatience. The day before 
her birthday he was in a fever of agitation.
   Mrs. Epanchin, long accustomed to her husband's infidelities, had heard of th
e pearls, and the rumour excited her liveliest curiosity and interest. The gener
al remarked her suspicions, and felt that a grand explanation must shortly take 
place-which fact alarmed him much.
   This is the reason why he was so unwilling to take lunch (on the morning upon
 which we took up this narrative) with the rest of his family. Before the prince
's arrival he had made up his mind to plead business, and "cut" the meal; which 
simply meant running away.
   He was particularly anxious that this one day should be passed-especially the
 evening-without unpleasantness between himself and his family; and just at the 
right moment the prince turned up-"as though Heaven had sent him on purpose," sa
id the general to himself, as he left the study to seek out the wife of his boso
m.
      V.
   Mrs. General Epanchin was a proud woman by nature. What must her feelings hav
e been when she heard that Prince Muishkin, the last of his and her line, had ar
rived in beggar's guise, a wretched idiot, a recipient of charity-all of which d
etails the general gave out for greater effect! He was anxious to steal her inte
rest at the first swoop, so as to distract her thoughts from other matters neare
r home.
   Mrs. Epanchin was in the habit of holding herself very straight, and staring 
before her, without speaking, in moments of excitement.
   She was a fine woman of the same age as her husband, with a slightly hooked n
ose, a high, narrow forehead, thick hair turning a little grey, and a sallow com
plexion. Her eyes were grey and wore a very curious expression at times. She bel
ieved them to be most effective-a belief that nothing could alter.
   "What, receive him! Now, at once?" asked Mrs. Epanchin, gazing vaguely at her
 husband as he stood fidgeting before her.
   "Oh, dear me, I assure you there is no need to stand on ceremony with him," t
he general explained hastily. "He is quite a child, not to say a pathetic-lookin
g creature. He has fits of some sort, and has just arrived from Switzerland, str
aight from the station, dressed like a German and without a farthing in his pock
et. I gave him twenty-five roubles to go on with, and am going to find him some 
easy place in one of the government offices. I should like you to ply him well w
ith the victuals, my dears, for I should think he must be very hungry."
   "You astonish me," said the lady, gazing as before. "Fits, and hungry too! Wh
at sort of fits?"
   "Oh, they don't come on frequently, besides, he's a regular child, though he 
seems to be fairly educated. I should like you, if possible, my dears," the gene
ral added, making slowly for the door, "to put him through his paces a bit, and 
see what he is good for. I think you should be kind to him; it is a good deed, y
ou know-however, just as you like, of course-but he is a sort of relation, remem
ber, and I thought it might interest you to see the young fellow, seeing that th
is is so."
   "Oh, of course, mamma, if we needn't stand on ceremony with him, we must give
 the poor fellow something to eat after his journey; especially as he has not th
e least idea where to go to," said Alexandra, the eldest of the girls.
   "Besides, he's quite a child; we can entertain him with a little hide-and-see
k, in case of need," said Adelaida.
   "Hide-and-seek? What do you mean?" inquired Mrs. Epanchin.
   "Oh, do stop pretending, mamma," cried Aglaya, in vexation. "Send him up, fat
her; mother allows."
   The general rang the bell and gave orders that the prince should be shown in.
   "Only on condition that he has a napkin under his chin at lunch, then," said 
Mrs. Epanchin, "and let Fedor, or Mavra, stand behind him while he eats. Is he q
uiet when he has these fits? He doesn't show violence, does he?"
   "On the contrary, he seems to be very well brought up. His manners are excell
ent-but here he is himself. Here you are, prince-let me introduce you, the last 
of the Muishkins, a relative of your own, my dear, or at least of the same name.
   Receive him kindly, please. They'll bring in lunch directly, prince; you must
 stop and have some, but you must excuse me. I'm in a hurry, I must be off-"
   "We all know where YOU must be off to!" said Mrs. Epanchin, in a meaning voic
e.
   "Yes, yes-I must hurry away, I'm late! Look here, dears, let him write you so
mething in your albums; you've no idea what a wonderful caligraphist he is, wond
erful talent! He has just written out 'Abbot Pafnute signed this' for me. Well, 
au revoir!"
   "Stop a minute; where are you off to? Who is this abbot?" cried Mrs. Epanchin
 to her retreating husband in a tone of excited annoyance.
   "Yes, my dear, it was an old abbot of that name-I must be off to see the coun
t, he's waiting for me, I'm late-Good-bye! Au revoir, prince!"-and the general b
olted at full speed.
   "Oh, yes-I know what count you're going to see!" remarked his wife in a cutti
ng manner, as she turned her angry eyes on the prince. "Now then, what's all thi
s about?-What abbot-Who's Pafnute?" she added, brusquely.
   "Mamma!" said Alexandra, shocked at her rudeness.
   Aglaya stamped her foot.
   "Nonsense! Let me alone!" said the angry mother. "Now then, prince, sit down 
here, no, nearer, come nearer the light! I want to have a good look at you. So, 
now then, who is this abbot?"
   "Abbot Pafnute," said our friend, seriously and with deference.
   "Pafnute, yes. And who was he?"
   Mrs. Epanchin put these questions hastily and brusquely, and when the prince 
answered she nodded her head sagely at each word he said.
   "The Abbot Pafnute lived in the fourteenth century," began the prince; "he wa
s in charge of one of the monasteries on the Volga, about where our present Kost
roma government lies. He went to Oreol and helped in the great matters then goin
g on in the religious world; he signed an edict there, and I have seen a print o
f his signature; it struck me, so I copied it. When the general asked me, in his
 study, to write something for him, to show my handwriting, I wrote 'The Abbot P
afnute signed this,' in the exact handwriting of the abbot. The general liked it
 very much, and that's why he recalled it just now. "
   "Aglaya, make a note of 'Pafnute,' or we shall forget him. H'm! and where is 
this signature?"
   "I think it was left on the general's table."
   "Let it be sent for at once!"
   "Oh, I'll write you a new one in half a minute," said the prince,
   "if you like!"
   "Of course, mamma!" said Alexandra. "But let's have lunch now, we are all hun
gry!"
   "Yes; come along, prince," said the mother, "are you very hungry?"
   "Yes; I must say that I am pretty hungry, thanks very much."
   "H'm! I like to see that you know your manners; and you are by no means such 
a person as the general thought fit to describe you.
   Come along; you sit here, opposite to me," she continued, "I wish to be able 
to see your face. Alexandra, Adelaida, look after the prince! He doesn't seem so
 very ill, does he? I don't think he requires a napkin under his chin, after all
; are you accustomed to having one on, prince?"
   "Formerly, when I was seven years old or so. I believe I wore one; but now I 
usually hold my napkin on my knee when I eat."
   "Of course, of course! And about your fits?"
   "Fits?" asked the prince, slightly surprised. "I very seldom have fits nowada
ys. I don't know how it may be here, though; they say the climate may be bad for
 me. "
   "He talks very well, you know!" said Mrs. Epanchin, who still continued to no
d at each word the prince spoke. "I really did not expect it at all; in fact, I 
suppose it was all stuff and nonsense on the general's part, as usual. Eat away,
 prince, and tell me where you were born, and where you were brought up. I wish 
to know all about you, you interest me very much!"
   The prince expressed his thanks once more, and eating heartily the while, rec
ommenced the narrative of his life in Switzerland, all of which we have heard be
fore. Mrs. Epanchin became more and more pleased with her guest; the girls, too,
 listened with considerable attention. In talking over the question of relations
hip it turned out that the prince was very well up in the matter and knew his pe
digree off by heart. It was found that scarcely any connection existed between h
imself and Mrs.
   Epanchin, but the talk, and the opportunity of conversing about her family tr
ee, gratified the latter exceedingly, and she rose from the table in great good 
humour.
   "Let's all go to my boudoir," she said, "and they shall bring some coffee in 
there. That's the room where we all assemble and busy ourselves as we like best,
" she explained. "Alexandra, my eldest, here, plays the piano, or reads or sews;
 Adelaida paints landscapes and portraits (but never finishes any); and Aglaya s
its and does nothing. I don't work too much, either. Here we are, now; sit down,
 prince, near the fire and talk to us. I want to hear you relate something. I wi
sh to make sure of you first and then tell my old friend, Princess Bielokonski, 
about you. I wish you to know all the good people and to interest them. Now then
, begin!"
   "Mamma, it's rather a strange order, that!" said Adelaida, who was fussing am
ong her paints and paint-brushes at the easel.
   Aglaya and Alexandra had settled themselves with folded hands on a sofa, evid
ently meaning to be listeners. The prince felt that the general attention was co
ncentrated upon himself.
   "I should refuse to say a word if I were ordered to tell a story like that!" 
observed Aglaya.
   "Why? what's there strange about it? He has a tongue. Why shouldn't he tell u
s something? I want to judge whether he is a good story-teller; anything you lik
e, prince-how you liked Switzerland, what was your first impression, anything. Y
ou'll see, he'll begin directly and tell us all about it beautifully."
   "The impression was forcible-" the prince began.
   "There, you see, girls," said the impatient lady, "he has begun, you see."
   "Well, then, LET him talk, mamma," said Alexandra. "This prince is a great hu
mbug and by no means an idiot," she whispered to Aglaya.
   "Oh, I saw that at once," replied the latter. "I don't think it at all nice o
f him to play a part. What does he wish to gain by it, I wonder?"
   "My first impression was a very strong one," repeated the prince.
   "When they took me away from Russia, I remember I passed through many German 
towns and looked out of the windows, but did not trouble so much as to ask quest
ions about them. This was after a long series of fits. I always used to fall int
o a sort of torpid condition after such a series, and lost my memory almost enti
rely; and though I was not altogether without reason at such times, yet I had no
 logical power of thought. This would continue for three or four days, and then 
I would recover myself again. I remember my melancholy was intolerable; I felt i
nclined to cry; I sat and wondered and wondered uncomfortably; the consciousness
 that everything was strange weighed terribly upon me; I could understand that i
t was all foreign and strange. I recollect I awoke from this state for the first
 time at Basle, one evening; the bray of a donkey aroused me, a donkey in the to
wn market. I saw the donkey and was extremely pleased with it, and from that mom
ent my head seemed to clear."
   "A donkey? How strange! Yet it is not strange. Anyone of us might fall in lov
e with a donkey! It happened in mythological times," said Madame Epanchin, looki
ng wrathfully at her daughters, who had begun to laugh. "Go on, prince."
   "Since that evening I have been specially fond of donkeys. I began to ask que
stions about them, for I had never seen one before; and I at once came to the co
nclusion that this must be one of the most useful of animals-strong, willing, pa
tient, cheap; and, thanks to this donkey, I began to like the whole country I wa
s travelling through; and my melancholy passed away."
   "All this is very strange and interesting," said Mrs. Epanchin.
   "Now let's leave the donkey and go on to other matters. What are you laughing
 at, Aglaya? and you too, Adelaida? The prince told us his experiences very clev
erly; he saw the donkey himself, and what have you ever seen? YOU have never bee
n abroad."
   "I have seen a donkey though, mamma!" said Aglaya.
   "And I've heard one!" said Adelaida. All three of the girls laughed out loud,
 and the prince laughed with them.
   "Well, it's too bad of you," said mamma. "You must forgive them, prince; they
 are good girls. I am very fond of them, though I often have to be scolding them
; they are all as silly and mad as march hares."
   "Oh, why shouldn't they laugh?" said the prince. " I shouldn't have let the c
hance go by in their place, I know. But I stick up for the donkey, all the same;
 he's a patient, good-natured fellow."
   "Are you a patient man, prince? I ask out of curiosity," said Mrs. Epanchin.
   All laughed again.
   "Oh, that wretched donkey again, I see!" cried the lady. "I assure you, princ
e, I was not guilty of the least-"
   "Insinuation? Oh! I assure you, I take your word for it." And the prince cont
inued laughing merrily.
   "I must say it's very nice of you to laugh. I see you really are a kind-heart
ed fellow," said Mrs. Epanchin.
   "I'm not always kind, though."
   "I am kind myself, and ALWAYS kind too, if you please!" she retorted, unexpec
tedly; "and that is my chief fault, for one ought not to be always kind. I am of
ten angry with these girls and their father; but the worst of it is, I am always
 kindest when I am cross. I was very angry just before you came, and Aglaya ther
e read me a lesson-thanks, Aglaya, dear-come and kiss me-there-that's enough" sh
e added, as Aglaya came forward and kissed her lips and then her hand. "Now then
, go on, prince.
   Perhaps you can think of something more exciting than about the donkey, eh?"
   "I must say, again, I can't understand how you can expect anyone to tell you 
stories straight away, so," said Adelaida. "I know I never could!"
   "Yes, but the prince can, because he is clever-cleverer than you are by ten o
r twenty times, if you like. There, that's so, prince; and seriously, let's drop
 the donkey now-what else did you see abroad, besides the donkey?"
   "Yes, but the prince told us about the donkey very cleverly, all the same," s
aid Alexandra. "I have always been most interested to hear how people go mad and
 get well again, and that sort of thing. Especially when it happens suddenly."
   "Quite so, quite so!" cried Mrs. Epanchin, delighted. "I see you CAN be sensi
ble now and then, Alexandra. You were speaking of Switzerland, prince?"
   "Yes. We came to Lucerne, and I was taken out in a boat. I felt how lovely it
 was, but the loveliness weighed upon me somehow or other, and made me feel mela
ncholy."
   "Why?" asked Alexandra.
   "I don't know; I always feel like that when I look at the beauties of nature 
for the first time; but then, I was ill at that time, of course!"
   "Oh, but I should like to see it!" said Adelaida; "and I don't know WHEN we s
hall ever go abroad. I've been two years looking out for a good subject for a pi
cture. I've done all I know. 'The North and South I know by heart,' as our poet 
observes. Do help me to a subject, prince."
   "Oh, but I know nothing about painting. It seems to me one only has to look, 
and paint what one sees."
   "But I don't know HOW to see!"
   "Nonsense, what rubbish you talk!" the mother struck in. "Not know how to see
! Open your eyes and look! If you can't see here, you won't see abroad either. T
ell us what you saw yourself, prince!"
   "Yes, that's better," said Adelaida; "the prince learned to see abroad."
   "Oh, I hardly know! You see, I only went to restore my health. I don't know w
hether I learned to see, exactly. I was very happy, however, nearly all the time
."
   "Happy! you can be happy?" cried Aglaya. "Then how can you say you did not le
arn to see? I should think you could teach us to see!"
   "Oh! DO teach us," laughed Adelaida.
   "Oh! I can't do that," said the prince, laughing too. "I lived almost all the
 while in one little Swiss village; what can I teach you? At first I was only ju
st not absolutely dull; then my health began to improve-then every day became de
arer and more precious to me, and the longer I stayed, the dearer became the tim
e to me; so much so that I could not help observing it; but why this was so, it 
would be difficult to say."
   "So that you didn't care to go away anywhere else?"
   "Well, at first I did; I was restless; I didn't know however I should manage 
to support life-you know there are such moments, especially in solitude. There w
as a waterfall near us, such a lovely thin streak of water, like a thread but wh
ite and moving.
   It fell from a great height, but it looked quite low, and it was half a mile 
away, though it did not seem fifty paces. I loved to listen to it at night, but 
it was then that I became so restless.
   Sometimes I went and climbed the mountain and stood there in the midst of the
 tall pines, all alone in the terrible silence, with our little village in the d
istance, and the sky so blue, and the sun so bright, and an old ruined castle on
 the mountain-side, far away. I used to watch the line where earth and sky met, 
and longed to go and seek there the key of all mysteries, thinking that I might 
find there a new life, perhaps some great city where life should be grander and 
richer-and then it struck me that life may be grand enough even in a prison."
   "I read that last most praiseworthy thought in my manual, when I was twelve y
ears old," said Aglaya.
   "All this is pure philosophy," said Adelaida. "You are a philosopher, prince,
 and have come here to instruct us in your views."
   "Perhaps you are right," said the prince, smiling. "I think I am a philosophe
r, perhaps, and who knows, perhaps I do wish to teach my views of things to thos
e I meet with?"
   "Your philosophy is rather like that of an old woman we know, who is rich and
 yet does nothing but try how little she can spend.
   She talks of nothing but money all day. Your great philosophical idea of a gr
and life in a prison and your four happy years in that Swiss village are like th
is, rather," said Aglaya.
   "As to life in a prison, of course there may be two opinions," said the princ
e. "I once heard the story of a man who lived twelve years in a prison-I heard i
t from the man himself. He was one of the persons under treatment with my profes
sor; he had fits, and attacks of melancholy, then he would weep, and once he tri
ed to commit suicide. HIS life in prison was sad enough; his only acquaintances 
were spiders and a tree that grew outside his grating-but I think I had better t
ell you of another man I met last year. There was a very strange feature in this
 case, strange because of its extremely rare occurrence. This man had once been 
brought to the scaffold in company with several others, and had had the sentence
 of death by shooting passed upon him for some political crime. Twenty minutes l
ater he had been reprieved and some other punishment substituted; but the interv
al between the two sentences, twenty minutes, or at least a quarter of an hour, 
had been passed in the certainty that within a few minutes he must die. I was ve
ry anxious to hear him speak of his impressions during that dreadful time, and I
 several times inquired of him as to what he thought and felt. He remembered eve
rything with the most accurate and extraordinary distinctness, and declared that
 he would never forget a single iota of the experience.
   "About twenty paces from the scaffold, where he had stood to hear the sentenc
e, were three posts, fixed in the ground, to which to fasten the criminals (of w
hom there were several). The first three criminals were taken to the posts, dres
sed in long white tunics, with white caps drawn over their faces, so that they c
ould not see the rifles pointed at them. Then a group of soldiers took their sta
nd opposite to each post. My friend was the eighth on the list, and therefore he
 would have been among the third lot to go up. A priest went about among them wi
th a cross: and there was about five minutes of time left for him to live.
   "He said that those five minutes seemed to him to be a most interminable peri
od, an enormous wealth of time; he seemed to be living, in these minutes, so man
y lives that there was no need as yet to think of that last moment, so that he m
ade several arrangements, dividing up the time into portions-one for saying fare
well to his companions, two minutes for that; then a couple more for thinking ov
er his own life and career and all about himself; and another minute for a last 
look around. He remembered having divided his time like this quite well. While s
aying goodbye to his friends he recollected asking one of them some very usual e
veryday question, and being much interested in the answer.
   Then having bade farewell, he embarked upon those two minutes which he had al
lotted to looking into himself; he knew beforehand what he was going to think ab
out. He wished to put it to himself as quickly and clearly as possible, that her
e was he, a living, thinking man, and that in three minutes he would be nobody; 
or if somebody or something, then what and where? He thought he would decide thi
s question once for all in these last three minutes. A little way off there stoo
d a church, and its gilded spire glittered in the sun. He remembered staring stu
bbornly at this spire, and at the rays of light sparkling from it. He could not 
tear his eyes from these rays of light; he got the idea that these rays were his
 new nature, and that in three minutes he would become one of them, amalgamated 
somehow with them.
   "The repugnance to what must ensue almost immediately, and the uncertainty, w
ere dreadful, he said; but worst of all was the idea, 'What should I do if I wer
e not to die now? What if I were to return to life again? What an eternity of da
ys, and all mine!
   How I should grudge and count up every minute of it, so as to waste not a sin
gle instant!' He said that this thought weighed so upon him and became such a te
rrible burden upon his brain that he could not bear it, and wished they would sh
oot him quickly and have done with it."
   The prince paused and all waited, expecting him to go on again and finish the
 story.
   "Is that all?" asked Aglaya.
   "All? Yes," said the prince, emerging from a momentary reverie.
   "And why did you tell us this?"
   "Oh, I happened to recall it, that's all! It fitted into the conversation-"
   "You probably wish to deduce, prince," said Alexandra, "that moments of time 
cannot be reckoned by money value, and that sometimes five minutes are worth pri
celess treasures. All this is very praiseworthy; but may I ask about this friend
 of yours, who told you the terrible experience of his life? He was reprieved, y
ou say; in other words, they did restore to him that 'eternity of days.' What di
d he do with these riches of time? Did he keep careful account of his minutes?"
   "Oh no, he didn't! I asked him myself. He said that he had not lived a bit as
 he had intended, and had wasted many, and many a minute."
   "Very well, then there's an experiment, and the thing is proved; one cannot l
ive and count each moment; say what you like, but one  CANNOT."
   "That is true," said the prince, "I have thought so myself. And yet, why shou
ldn't one do it?"
   "You think, then, that you could live more wisely than other people?" said Ag
laya.
   "I have had that idea."
   "And you have it still?"
   "Yes-I have it still," the prince replied.
   He had contemplated Aglaya until now, with a pleasant though rather timid smi
le, but as the last words fell from his lips he began to laugh, and looked at he
r merrily.
   "You are not very modest!" said she.
   "But how brave you are!" said he. "You are laughing, and I-that man's tale im
pressed me so much, that I dreamt of it afterwards; yes, I dreamt of those five 
minutes"
   He looked at his listeners again with that same serious, searching expression
.
   "You are not angry with me?" he asked suddenly, and with a kind of nervous hu
rry, although he looked them straight in the face.
   "Why should we be angry?" they cried.
   "Only because I seem to be giving you a lecture, all the time!"
   At this they laughed heartily.
   "Please don't be angry with me," continued the prince. "I know very well that
 I have seen less of life than other people, and have less knowledge of it. I mu
st appear to speak strangely sometimes"
   He said the last words nervously.
   "You say you have been happy, and that proves you have lived, not less, but m
ore than other people. Why make all these excuses?" interrupted Aglaya in a mock
ing tone of voice. "Besides, you need not mind about lecturing us; you have noth
ing to boast of. With your quietism, one could live happily for a hundred years 
at least. One might show you the execution of a felon, or show you one's little 
finger. You could draw a moral from either, and be quite satisfied. That sort of
 existence is easy enough."
   "I can't understand why you always fly into a temper," said Mrs.
   Epanchin, who had been listening to the conversation and examining the faces 
of the speakers in turn. "I do not understand what you mean. What has your littl
e finger to do with it? The prince talks well, though he is not amusing. He bega
n all right, but now he seems sad."
   "Never mind, mamma! Prince, I wish you had seen an execution," said Aglaya. "
I should like to ask you a question about that, if you had."
   "I have seen an execution," said the prince.
   "You have!" cried Aglaya. "I might have guessed it. That's a fitting crown to
 the rest of the story. If you have seen an execution, how can you say you lived
 happily all the while?"
   "But is there capital punishment where you were?" asked Adelaida.
   "I saw it at Lyons. Schneider took us there, and as soon as we arrived we cam
e in for that."
   "Well, and did you like it very much? Was it very edifying and instructive?" 
asked Aglaya.
   "No, I didn't like it at all, and was ill after seeing it; but I confess I st
ared as though my eyes were fixed to the sight. I could not tear them away."
   "I, too, should have been unable to tear my eyes away," said Aglaya.
   "They do not at all approve of women going to see an execution there. The wom
en who do go are condemned for it afterwards in the newspapers."
   "That is, by contending that it is not a sight for women they admit that it i
s a sight for men. I congratulate them on the deduction. I suppose you quite agr
ee with them, prince?"
   "Tell us about the execution," put in Adelaida.
   "I would much rather not, just now," said the prince, a little disturbed and 
frowning slightly;
   " You don't seem to want to tell us," said Aglaya, with a mocking air.
   " No,-the thing is, I was telling all about the execution a little while ago,
 and-"
   "Whom did you tell about it?"
   "The man-servant, while I was waiting to see the general."
   "Our man-servant?" exclaimed several voices at once.
   "Yes, the one who waits in the entrance hall, a greyish, redfaced man-"
   "The prince is clearly a democrat," remarked Aglaya.
   "Well, if you could tell Aleksey about it, surely you can tell us too."
   "I do so want to hear about it," repeated Adelaida.
   "Just now, I confess," began the prince, with more animation,
   "when you asked me for a subject for a picture, I confess I had serious thoug
hts of giving you one. I thought of asking you to draw the face of a criminal, o
ne minute before the fall of the guillotine, while the wretched man is still sta
nding on the scaffold, preparatory to placing his neck on the block."
   "What, his face? only his face?" asked Adelaida. "That would be a strange sub
ject indeed. And what sort of a picture would that make?"
   "Oh, why not?" the prince insisted, with some warmth. "When I was in Basle I 
saw a picture very much in that style-I should like to tell you about it; I will
 some time or other; it struck me very forcibly."
   "Oh, you shall tell us about the Basle picture another time; now we must have
 all about the execution," said Adelaida. "Tell us about that face as; it appear
ed to your imagination-how should it be drawn?-just the face alone, do you mean?
"
   "It was just a minute before the execution," began the prince, readily, carri
ed away by the recollection and evidently forgetting everything else in a moment
; "just at the instant when he stepped off the ladder on to the scaffold. He hap
pened to look in my direction: I saw his eyes and understood all, at once-but ho
w am I to describe it? I do so wish you or somebody else could draw it, you, if 
possible. I thought at the time what a picture it would make. You must imagine a
ll that went before, of course, all-all. He had lived in the prison for some tim
e and had not expected that the execution would take place for at least a week y
et-he had counted on all the formalities and so on taking time; but it so happen
ed that his papers had been got ready quickly. At five o'clock in the morning he
 was asleep-it was October, and at five in the morning it was cold and dark. The
 governor of the prison comes in on tip-toe and touches the sleeping man's shoul
der gently. He starts up. 'What is it?' he says. 'The execution is fixed for ten
 o'clock.' He was only just awake, and would not believe at first, but began to 
argue that his papers would not be out for a week, and so on. When he was wide a
wake and realized the truth, he became very silent and argued no more-so they sa
y; but after a bit he said: 'It comes very hard on one so suddenly' and then he 
was silent again and said nothing.
   "The three or four hours went by, of course, in necessary preparations-the pr
iest, breakfast, (coffee, meat, and some wine they gave him; doesn't it seem rid
iculous?) And yet I believe these people give them a good breakfast out of pure 
kindness of heart, and believe that they are doing a good action.
   Then he is dressed, and then begins the procession through the town to the sc
affold. I think he, too, must feel that he has an age to live still while they c
art him along. Probably he thought, on the way, 'Oh, I have a long, long time ye
t. Three streets of life yet! When we've passed this street there'll be that oth
er one; and then that one where the baker's shop is on the right; and when shall
 we get there? It's ages, ages!' Around him are crowds shouting, yelling-ten tho
usand faces, twenty thousand eyes. All this has to be endured, and especially th
e thought: 'Here are ten thousand men, and not one of them is going to be execut
ed, and yet I am to die.' Well, all that is preparatory.
   "At the scaffold there is a ladder, and just there he burst into tears-and th
is was a strong man, and a terribly wicked one, they say! There was a priest wit
h him the whole time, talking; even in the cart as they drove along, he talked a
nd talked. Probably the other heard nothing; he would begin to listen now and th
en, and at the third word or so he had forgotten all about it.
   "At last he began to mount the steps; his legs were tied, so that he had to t
ake very small steps. The priest, who seemed to be a wise man, had stopped talki
ng now, and only held the cross for the wretched fellow to kiss. At the foot of 
the ladder he had been pale enough; but when he set foot on the scaffold at the 
top, his face suddenly became the colour of paper, positively like white notepap
er. His legs must have become suddenly feeble and helpless, and he felt a chokin
g in his throat-you know the sudden feeling one has in moments of terrible fear,
 when one does not lose one's wits, but is absolutely powerless to move? If some
 dreadful thing were suddenly to happen; if a house were just about to fall on o
ne;-don't you know how one would long to sit down and shut one's eyes and wait, 
and wait? Well, when this terrible feeling came over him, the priest quickly pre
ssed the cross to his lips, without a word-a little silver cross it wasand he ke
pt on pressing it to the man's lips every second. And whenever the cross touched
 his lips, the eyes would open for a moment, and the legs moved once, and he kis
sed the cross greedily, hurriedly-just as though he were anxious to catch hold o
f something in case of its being useful to him afterwards, though he could hardl
y have had any connected religious thoughts at the time. And so up to the very b
lock.
   "How strange that criminals seldom swoon at such a moment! On the contrary, t
he brain is especially active, and works incessantly-probably hard, hard, hard-l
ike an engine at full pressure. I imagine that various thoughts must beat loud a
nd fast through his head-all unfinished ones, and strange, funny thoughts, very 
likely!-like this, for instance: 'That man is looking at me, and he has a wart o
n his forehead! and the executioner has burst one of his buttons, and the lowest
 one is all rusty!' And meanwhile he notices and remembers everything. There is 
one point that cannot be forgotten, round which everything else dances and turns
 about; and because of this point he cannot faint, and this lasts until the very
 final quarter of a second, when the wretched neck is on the block and the victi
m listens and waits and KNOWS-that's the point, he KNOWS that he is just NOW abo
ut to die, and listens for the rasp of the iron over his head. If I lay there, I
 should certainly listen for that grating sound, and hear it, too!
   There would probably be but the tenth part of an instant left to hear it in, 
but one would certainly hear it. And imagine, some people declare that when the 
head flies off it is CONSCIOUS of having flown off! Just imagine what a thing to
 realize! Fancy if consciousness were to last for even five seconds!
   "Draw the scaffold so that only the top step of the ladder comes in clearly. 
The criminal must be just stepping on to it, his face as white as note-paper. Th
e priest is holding the cross to his blue lips, and the criminal kisses it, and 
knows and sees and understands everything. The cross and the head-there's your p
icture; the priest and the executioner, with his two assistants, and a few heads
 and eyes below. Those might come in as subordinate accessories-a sort of mist. 
There's a picture for you." The prince paused, and looked around.
   "Certainly that isn't much like quietism," murmured Alexandra, half to hersel
f.
   "Now tell us about your love affairs," said Adelaida, after a moment's pause.
   The prince gazed at her in amazement.
   "You know," Adelaida continued, "you owe us a description of the Basle pictur
e; but first I wish to hear how you fell in love.
   Don't deny the fact, for you did, of course. Besides, you stop philosophizing
 when you are telling about anything."
   "Why are you ashamed of your stories the moment after you have told them?" as
ked Aglaya, suddenly.
   "How silly you are!" said Mrs. Epanchin, looking indignantly towards the last
 speaker.
   "Yes, that wasn't a clever remark," said Alexandra.
   "Don't listen to her, prince," said Mrs. Epanchin; "she says that sort of thi
ng out of mischief. Don't think anything of their nonsense, it means nothing. Th
ey love to chaff, but they like you. I can see it in their faces-I know their fa
ces."
   "I know their faces, too," said the prince, with a peculiar stress on the wor
ds.
   "How so?" asked Adelaida, with curiosity.
   "What do YOU know about our faces?" exclaimed the other two, in chorus.
   But the prince was silent and serious. All awaited his reply.
   "I'll tell you afterwards," he said quietly.
   "Ah, you want to arouse our curiosity!" said Aglaya. "And how terribly solemn
 you are about it!"
   "Very well," interrupted Adelaida, "then if you can read faces so well, you m
ust have been in love. Come now; I've guessed-let's have the secret!"
   "I have not been in love," said the prince, as quietly and seriously as befor
e. "I have been happy in another way."
   "How, how?"
   "Well, I'll tell you," said the prince, apparently in a deep reverie.
      VI.
   "Here you all are," began the prince, "settling yourselves down to listen to 
me with so much curiosity, that if I do not satisfy you you will probably be ang
ry with me. No, no! I'm only joking!" he added, hastily, with a smile.
   "Well, then-they were all children there, and I was always among children and
 only with children. They were the children of the village in which I lived, and
 they went to the school there-all of them. I did not teach them, oh no; there w
as a master for that, one Jules Thibaut. I may have taught them some things, but
 I was among them just as an outsider, and I passed all four years of my life th
ere among them. I wished for nothing better; I used to tell them everything and 
hid nothing from them. Their fathers and relations were very angry with me, beca
use the children could do nothing without me at last, and used to throng after m
e at all times. The schoolmaster was my greatest enemy in the end! I had many en
emies, and all because of the children. Even Schneider reproached me. What were 
they afraid of? One can tell a child everything, anything. I have often been str
uck by the fact that parents know their children so little. They should not conc
eal so much from them. How well even little children understand that their paren
ts conceal things from them, because they consider them too young to understand!
 Children are capable of giving advice in the most important matters. How can on
e deceive these dear little birds, when they look at one so sweetly and confidin
gly? I call them birds because there is nothing in the world better than birds!
   "However, most of the people were angry with me about one and the same thing;
 but Thibaut simply was jealous of me. At first he had wagged his head and wonde
red how it was that the children understood what I told them so well, and could 
not learn from him; and he laughed like anything when I replied that neither he 
nor I could teach them very much, but that THEY might teach us a good deal.
   "How he could hate me and tell scandalous stories about me, living among chil
dren as he did, is what I cannot understand.
   Children soothe and heal the wounded heart. I remember there was one poor fel
low at our professor's who was being treated for madness, and you have no idea w
hat those children did for him, eventually. I don't think he was mad, but only t
erribly unhappy. But I'll tell you all about him another day. Now I must get on 
with this story.
   "The children did not love me at first; I was such a sickly, awkward kind of 
a fellow then-and I know I am ugly. Besides, I was a foreigner. The children use
d to laugh at me, at first; and they even went so far as to throw stones at me, 
when they saw me kiss Marie. I only kissed her once in my life-no, no, don't lau
gh!" The prince hastened to suppress the smiles of his audience at this point. "
It was not a matter of LOVE at all! If only you knew what a miserable creature s
he was, you would have pitied her, just as I did. She belonged to our village. H
er mother was an old, old woman, and they used to sell string and thread, and so
ap and tobacco, out of the window of their little house, and lived on the pittan
ce they gained by this trade. The old woman was ill and very old, and could hard
ly move. Marie was her daughter, a girl of twenty, weak and thin and consumptive
; but still she did heavy work at the houses around, day by day.
   Well, one fine day a commercial traveller betrayed her and carried her off; a
nd a week later he deserted her. She came home dirty, draggled, and shoeless; sh
e had walked for a whole week without shoes; she had slept in the fields, and ca
ught a terrible cold; her feet were swollen and sore, and her hands torn and scr
atched all over. She never had been pretty even before; but her eyes were quiet,
 innocent, kind eyes.
   "She was very quiet always-and I remember once, when she had suddenly begun s
inging at her work, everyone said, 'Marie tried to sing today!' and she got so c
haffed that she was silent for ever after. She had been treated kindly in the pl
ace before; but when she came back now-ill and shunned and miserable-not one of 
them all had the slightest sympathy for her. Cruel people! Oh, what hazy underst
andings they have on such matters! Her mother was the first to show the way. She
 received her wrathfully, unkindly, and with contempt. 'You have disgraced me,' 
she said.
   She was the first to cast her into ignominy; but when they all heard that Mar
ie had returned to the village, they ran out to see her and crowded into the lit
tle cottage-old men, children, women, girls-such a hurrying, stamping, greedy cr
owd. Marie was lying on the floor at the old woman's feet, hungry, torn, draggle
d, crying, miserable.
   "When everyone crowded into the room she hid her face in her dishevelled hair
 and lay cowering on the floor. Everyone looked at her as though she were a piec
e of dirt off the road. The old men scolded and condemned, and the young ones la
ughed at her. The women condemned her too, and looked at her contemptuously, jus
t as though she were some loathsome insect.
   "Her mother allowed all this to go on, and nodded her head and encouraged the
m. The old woman was very ill at that time, and knew she was dying (she really d
id die a couple of months later), and though she felt the end approaching she ne
ver thought of forgiving her daughter, to the very day of her death. She would n
ot even speak to her. She made her sleep on straw in a shed, and hardly gave her
 food enough to support life.
   "Marie was very gentle to her mother, and nursed her, and did everything for 
her; but the old woman accepted all her services without a word and never showed
 her the slightest kindness. Marie bore all this; and I could see when I got to 
know her that she thought it quite right and fitting, considering herself the lo
west and meanest of creatures.
   "When the old woman took to her bed finally, the other old women in the villa
ge sat with her by turns, as the custom is there; and then Marie was quite drive
n out of the house. They gave her no food at all, and she could not get any work
 in the village; none would employ her. The men seemed to consider her no longer
 a woman, they said such dreadful things to her. Sometimes on Sundays, if they w
ere drunk enough, they used to throw her a penny or two, into the mud, and Marie
 would silently pick up the money. She had began to spit blood at that time.
   "At last her rags became so tattered and torn that she was ashamed of appeari
ng in the village any longer. The children used to pelt her with mud; so she beg
ged to be taken on as assistant cowherd, but the cowherd would not have her. The
n she took to helping him without leave; and he saw how valuable her assistance 
was to him, and did not drive her away again; on the contrary, he occasionally g
ave her the remnants of his dinner, bread and cheese. He considered that he was 
being very kind. When the mother died, the village parson was not ashamed to hol
d Marie up to public derision and shame. Marie was standing at the coffin's head
, in all her rags, crying.
   "A crowd of people had collected to see how she would cry. The parson, a youn
g fellow ambitious of becoming a great preacher, began his sermon and pointed to
 Marie. 'There,' he said, 'there is the cause of the death of this venerable wom
an'-(which was a lie, because she had been ill for at least two years)-'there sh
e stands before you, and dares not lift her eyes from the ground, because she kn
ows that the finger of God is upon her. Look at her tatters and rags-the badge o
f those who lose their virtue. Who is she? her daughter!' and so on to the end.
   "And just fancy, this infamy pleased them, all of them, nearly.
   Only the children had altered-for then they were all on my side and had learn
ed to love Marie.
   "This is how it was: I had wished to do something for Marie; I longed to give
 her some money, but I never had a farthing while I was there. But I had a littl
e diamond pin, and this I sold to a travelling pedlar; he gave me eight francs f
or it-it was worth at least forty.
   "I long sought to meet Marie alone; and at last I did meet her, on the hillsi
de beyond the village. I gave her the eight francs and asked her to take care of
 the money because I could get no more; and then I kissed her and said that she 
was not to suppose I kissed her with any evil motives or because I was in love w
ith her, for that I did so solely out of pity for her, and because from the firs
t I had not accounted her as guilty so much as unfortunate. I longed to console 
and encourage her somehow, and to assure her that she was not the low, base thin
g which she and others strove to make out; but I don't think she understood me.
   She stood before me, dreadfully ashamed of herself, and with downcast eyes; a
nd when I had finished she kissed my hand. I would have kissed hers, but she dre
w it away. Just at this moment the whole troop of children saw us. (I found out 
afterwards that they had long kept a watch upon me.) They all began whistling an
d clapping their hands, and laughing at us. Marie ran away at once; and when I t
ried to talk to them, they threw stones at me. All the village heard of it the s
ame day, and Marie's position became worse than ever. The children would not let
 her pass now in the streets, but annoyed her and threw dirt at her more than be
fore.
   They used to run after her-she racing away with her poor feeble lungs panting
 and gasping, and they pelting her and shouting abuse at her.
   "Once I had to interfere by force; and after that I took to speaking to them 
every day and whenever I could. Occasionally they stopped and listened; but they
 teased Marie all the same.
   "I told them how unhappy Marie was, and after a while they stopped their abus
e of her, and let her go by silently. Little by little we got into the way of co
nversing together, the children and I. I concealed nothing from them, I told the
m all. They listened very attentively and soon began to be sorry for Marie.
   At last some of them took to saying 'Good-morning' to her, kindly, when they 
met her. It is the custom there to salute anyone you meet with 'Good-morning' wh
ether acquainted or not. I can imagine how astonished Marie was at these first g
reetings from the children.
   "Once two little girls got hold of some food and took it to her, and came bac
k and told me. They said she had burst into tears, and that they loved her very 
much now. Very soon after that they all became fond of Marie, and at the same ti
me they began to develop the greatest affection for myself. They often came to m
e and begged me to tell them stories. I think I must have told stories well, for
 they did so love to hear them. At last I took to reading up interesting things 
on purpose to pass them on to the little ones, and this went on for all the rest
 of my time there, three years. Later, when everyone-even Schneider-was angry wi
th me for hiding nothing from the children, I pointed out how foolish it was, fo
r they always knew things, only they learnt them in a way that soiled their mind
s but not so from me. One has only to remember one's own childhood to admit the 
truth of this.
   But nobody was convinced It was two weeks before her mother died that I had ki
ssed Marie; and when the clergyman preached that sermon the children were all on
 my side.
   "When I told them what a shame it was of the parson to talk as he had done, a
nd explained my reason, they were so angry that some of them went and broke his 
windows with stones. Of course I stopped them, for that was not right, but all t
he village heard of it, and how I caught it for spoiling the children! Everyone 
discovered now that the little ones had taken to being fond of Marie, and their 
parents were terribly alarmed; but Marie was so happy. The children were forbidd
en to meet her; but they used to run out of the village to the herd and take her
 food and things; and sometimes just ran off there and kissed her, and said, 'Je
 vous aime, Marie!' and then trotted back again. They imagined that I was in lov
e with Marie, and this was the only point on which I did not undeceive them, for
 they got such enjoyment out of it. And what delicacy and tenderness they showed
!
   "In the evening I used to walk to the waterfall. There was a spot there which
 was quite closed in and hidden from view by large trees; and to this spot the c
hildren used to come to me. They could not bear that their dear Leon should love
 a poor girl without shoes to her feet and dressed all in rags and tatters.
   So, would you believe it, they actually clubbed together, somehow, and bought
 her shoes and stockings, and some linen, and even a dress! I can't understand h
ow they managed it, but they did it, all together. When I asked them about it th
ey only laughed and shouted, and the little girls clapped their hands and kissed
 me. I sometimes went to see Marie secretly, too. She had become very ill, and c
ould hardly walk. She still went with the herd, but could not help the herdsman 
any longer. She used to sit on a stone near, and wait there almost motionless al
l day, till the herd went home. Her consumption was so advanced, and she was so 
weak, that she used to sit with closed eyes, breathing heavily. Her face was as 
thin as a skeleton's, and sweat used to stand on her white brow in large drops. 
I always found her sitting just like that. I used to come up quietly to look at 
her; but Marie would hear me, open her eyes, and tremble violently as she kissed
 my hands. I did not take my hand away because it made her happy to have it, and
 so she would sit and cry quietly.
   Sometimes she tried to speak; but it was very difficult to understand her. Sh
e was almost like a madwoman, with excitement and ecstasy, whenever I came. Occa
sionally the children came with me; when they did so, they would stand some way 
off and keep guard over us, so as to tell me if anybody came near. This was a gr
eat pleasure to them.
   "When we left her, Marie used to relapse at once into her old condition, and 
sit with closed eyes and motionless limbs. One day she could not go out at all, 
and remained at home all alone in the empty hut; but the children very soon beca
me aware of the fact, and nearly all of them visited her that day as she lay alo
ne and helpless in her miserable bed.
   "For two days the children looked after her, and then, when the village peopl
e got to know that Marie was really dying, some of the old women came and took i
t in turns to sit by her and look after her a bit. I think they began to be a li
ttle sorry for her in the village at last; at all events they did not interfere 
with the children any more, on her account.
   "Marie lay in a state of uncomfortable delirium the whole while; she coughed 
dreadfully. The old women would not let the children stay in the room; but they 
all collected outside the window each morning, if only for a moment, and shouted
 'Bon jour, notre bonne Marie!' and Marie no sooner caught sight of, or heard th
em, and she became quite animated at once, and, in spite of the old women, would
 try to sit up and nod her head and smile at them, and thank them. The little on
es used to bring her nice things and sweets to eat, but she could hardly touch a
nything. Thanks to them, I assure you, the girl died almost perfectly happy. She
 almost forgot her misery, and seemed to accept their love as a sort of symbol o
f pardon for her offence, though she never ceased to consider herself a dreadful
 sinner. They used to flutter at her window just like little birds, calling out:
 'Nous t'aimons, Marie!' "She died very soon; I had thought she would live much 
longer.
   The day before her death I went to see her for the last time, just before sun
set. I think she recognized me, for she pressed my hand.
   "Next morning they came and told me that Marie was dead. The children could n
ot be restrained now; they went and covered her coffin with flowers, and put a w
reath of lovely blossoms on her head. The pastor did not throw any more shameful
 words at the poor dead woman; but there were very few people at the funeral.
   However, when it came to carrying the coffin, all the children rushed up, to 
carry it themselves. Of course they could not do it alone, but they insisted on 
helping, and walked alongside and behind, crying.
   "They have planted roses all round her grave, and every year they look alter 
the flowers and make Marie's resting-place as beautiful as they can. I was in il
l odour after all this with the parents of the children, and especially with the
 parson and schoolmaster. Schneider was obliged to promise that I should not mee
t them and talk to them; but we conversed from a distance by signs, and they use
d to write me sweet little notes. Afterwards I came closer than ever to those li
ttle souls, but even then it was very dear to me, to have them so fond of me.
   "Schneider said that I did the children great harm by my pernicious 'system';
 what nonsense that was! And what did he mean by my system? He said afterwards t
hat he believed I was a child myself-just before I came away. 'You have the form
 and face of an adult' he said, 'but as regards soul, and character, and perhaps
 even intelligence, you are a child in the completest sense of the word, and alw
ays will be, if you live to be sixty.' I laughed very much, for of course that i
s nonsense. But it is a fact that I do not care to be among grown-up people and 
much prefer the society of children. However kind people may be to me, I never f
eel quite at home with them, and am always glad to get back to my little compani
ons. Now my companions have always been children, not because I was a child myse
lf once, but because young things attract me. On one of the first days of my sta
y in Switzerland, I was strolling about alone and miserable, when I came upon th
e children rushing noisily out of school, with their slates and bags, and books,
 their games, their laughter and shouts-and my soul went out to them. I stopped 
and laughed happily as I watched their little feet moving so quickly. Girls and 
boys, laughing and crying; for as they went home many of them found time to figh
t and make peace, to weep and play. I forgot my troubles in looking at them. And
 then, all those three years, I tried to understand why men should be for ever t
ormenting themselves. I lived the life of a child there, and thought I should ne
ver leave the little village; indeed, I was far from thinking that I should ever
 return to Russia. But at last I recognized the fact that Schneider could not ke
ep me any longer.
   And then something so important happened, that Schneider himself urged me to 
depart. I am going to see now if can get good advice about it. Perhaps my lot in
 life will be changed; but that is not the principal thing. The principal thing 
is the entire change that has already come over me. I left many things behind me
-too many. They have gone. On the journey I said to myself, 'I am going into the
 world of men. I don't know much, perhaps, but a new life has begun for me.' I m
ade up my mind to be honest, and steadfast in accomplishing my task. Perhaps I s
hall meet with troubles and many disappointments, but I have made up my mind to 
be polite and sincere to everyone; more cannot be asked of me.
   People may consider me a child if they like. I am often called an idiot, and 
at one time I certainly was so ill that I was nearly as bad as an idiot; but I a
m not an idiot now. How can I possibly be so when I know myself that I am consid
ered one?
   "When I received a letter from those dear little souls, while passing through
 Berlin, I only then realized how much I loved them. It was very, very painful, 
getting that first little letter. How melancholy they had been when they saw me 
off! For a month before, they had been talking of my departure and sorrowing ove
r it; and at the waterfall, of an evening, when we parted for the night, they wo
uld hug me so tight and kiss me so warmly, far more so than before. And every no
w and then they would turn up one by one when I was alone, just to give me a kis
s and a hug, to show their love for me. The whole flock went with me to the stat
ion, which was about a mile from the village, and every now and then one of them
 would stop to throw his arms round me, and all the little girls had tears in th
eir voices, though they tried hard not to cry. As the train steamed out of the s
tation, I saw them all standing on the platform waving to me and crying 'Hurrah!
' till they were lost in the distance.
   "I assure you, when I came in here just now and saw your kind faces (I can re
ad faces well) my heart felt light for the first time since that moment of parti
ng. I think I must be one of those who are born to be in luck, for one does not 
often meet with people whom one feels he can love from the first sight of their 
faces; and yet, no sooner do I step out of the railway carriage than I happen up
on you!
   "I know it is more or less a shamefaced thing to speak of one's feelings befo
re others; and yet here am I talking like this to you, and am not a bit ashamed 
or shy. I am an unsociable sort of fellow and shall very likely not come to see 
you again for some time; but don't think the worse of me for that. It is not tha
t I do not value your society; and you must never suppose that I have taken offe
nce at anything.
   "You asked me about your faces, and what I could read in them; I will tell yo
u with the greatest pleasure. You, Adelaida Ivanovna, have a very happy face; it
 is the most sympathetic of the three.
   Not to speak of your natural beauty, one can look at your face and say to one
's self, 'She has the face of a kind sister.' You are simple and merry, but you 
can see into another's heart very quickly. That's what I read in your face.
   "You too, Alexandra Ivanovna, have a very lovely face; but I think you may ha
ve some secret sorrow. Your heart is undoubtedly a kind, good one, but you are n
ot merry. There is a certain suspicion of 'shadow' in your face, like in that of
 Holbein's Madonna in Dresden. So much for your face. Have I guessed right?
   "As for your face, Lizabetha Prokofievna, I not only think, but am perfectly 
SURE, that you are an absolute child-in all, in all, mind, both good and bad-and
 in spite of your years. Don't be angry with me for saying so; you know what my 
feelings for children are. And do not suppose that I am so candid out of pure si
mplicity of soul. Oh dear no, it is by no means the case!
   Perhaps I have my own very profound object in view."
      VII.
   When the prince ceased speaking all were gazing merrily at him-even Aglaya; b
ut Lizabetha Prokofievna looked the jolliest of all.
   "Well!" she cried, "we HAVE 'put him through his paces,' with a vengeance! My
 dears, you imagined, I believe, that you were about to patronize this young gen
tleman, like some poor protege picked up somewhere, and taken under your magnifi
cent protection. What fools we were, and what a specially big fool is your fathe
r! Well done, prince! I assure you the general actually asked me to put you thro
ugh your paces, and examine you. As to what you said about my face, you are abso
lutely correct in your judgment. I am a child, and know it. I knew it long befor
e you said so; you have expressed my own thoughts. I think your nature and mine 
must be extremely alike, and I am very glad of it. We are like two drops of wate
r, only you are a man and I a woman, and I've not been to Switzerland, and that 
is all the difference between us."
   "Don't be in a hurry, mother; the prince says that he has some motive behind 
his simplicity," cried Aglaya.
   "Yes, yes, so he does," laughed the others.
   "Oh, don't you begin bantering him," said mamma. "He is probably a good deal 
cleverer than all three of you girls put together. We shall see. Only you haven'
t told us anything about Aglaya yet, prince; and Aglaya and I are both waiting t
o hear."
   "I cannot say anything at present. I'll tell you afterwards."
   "Why? Her face is clear enough, isn't it?"
   "Oh yes, of course. You are very beautiful, Aglaya Ivanovna, so beautiful tha
t one is afraid to look at you."
   "Is that all? What about her character?" persisted Mrs. Epanchin.
   "It is difficult to judge when such beauty is concerned. I have not prepared 
my judgment. Beauty is a riddle."
   "That means that you have set Aglaya a riddle!" said Adelaida.
   "Guess it, Aglaya! But she's pretty, prince, isn't she?"
   "Most wonderfully so," said the latter, warmly, gazing at Aglaya with admirat
ion. "Almost as lovely as Nastasia Philipovna, but quite a different type."
   All present exchanged looks of surprise.
   "As lovely as WHO?" said Mrs. Epanchin. "As NASTASIA PHILIPOVNA?
   Where have you seen Nastasia Philipovna? What Nastasia Philipovna?"
   "Gavrila Ardalionovitch showed the general her portrait just now."
   "How so? Did he bring the portrait for my husband?"
   "Only to show it. Nastasia Philipovna gave it to Gavrila Ardalionovitch today
, and the latter brought it here to show to the general."
   "I must see it!" cried Mrs. Epanchin. "Where is the portrait? If she gave it 
to him, he must have it; and he is still in the study. He never leaves before fo
ur o'clock on Wednesdays. Send for Gavrila Ardalionovitch at once. No, I don't l
ong to see HIM so much. Look here, dear prince, BE so kind, will you? Just step 
to the study and fetch this portrait! Say we want to look at it.
   Please do this for me, will you?"
   "He is a nice fellow, but a little too simple," said Adelaida, as the prince 
left the room.
   "He is, indeed," said Alexandra; "almost laughably so at times."
   Neither one nor the other seemed to give expression to her full thoughts.
   "He got out of it very neatly about our faces, though," said Aglaya. He flatt
ered us all round, even mamma."
   "Nonsense" cried the latter. "He did not flatter me. It was I who found his a
ppreciation flattering. I think you are a great deal more foolish than he is. He
 is simple, of course, but also very knowing. Just like myself."
   "How stupid of me to speak of the portrait," thought the prince as he entered
 the study, with a feeling of guilt at his heart,
   "and yet, perhaps I was right after all." He had an idea, unformed as yet, bu
t a strange idea.
   Gavrila Ardalionovitch was still sitting in the study, buried in a mass of pa
pers. He looked as though he did not take his salary from the public company, wh
ose servant he was, for a sinecure.
   He grew very wroth and confused when the prince asked for the portrait, and e
xplained how it came about that he had spoken of it.
   "Oh, curse it all," he said; "what on earth must you go blabbing for? You kno
w nothing about the thing, and yet-idiot!" he added, muttering the last word to 
himself in irrepressible rage.
   "I am very sorry; I was not thinking at the time. I merely said that Aglaya w
as almost as beautiful as Nastasia Philipovna."
   Gania asked for further details; and the prince once more repeated the conver
sation. Gania looked at him with ironical contempt the while.
   "Nastasia Philipovna," he began, and there paused; he was clearly much agitat
ed and annoyed. The prince reminded him of the portrait.
   "Listen, prince," said Gania, as though an idea had just struck him, "I wish 
to ask you a great favour, and yet I really don't know-"
   He paused again, he was trying to make up his mind to something, and was turn
ing the matter over. The prince waited quietly. Once more Gania fixed him with i
ntent and questioning eyes.
   "Prince," he began again, "they are rather angry with me, in there, owing to 
a circumstance which I need not explain, so that I do not care to go in at prese
nt without an invitation. I particularly wish to speak to Aglaya, but I have wri
tten a few words in case I shall not have the chance of seeing her" (here the pr
ince observed a small note in his hand), "and I do not know how to get my commun
ication to her. Don't you think you could undertake to give it to her at once, b
ut only to her, mind, and so that no one else should see you give it? It isn't m
uch of a secret, but still-Well, will you do it?"
   "I don't quite like it," replied the prince.
   "Oh, but it is absolutely necessary for me," Gania entreated.
   "Believe me, if it were not so, I would not ask you; how else am I to get it 
to her? It is most important, dreadfully important!"
   Gania was evidently much alarmed at the idea that the prince would not consen
t to take his note, and he looked at him now with an expression of absolute entr
eaty.
   "Well, I will take it then."
   "But mind, nobody is to see!" cried the delighted Gania "And of course I may 
rely on your word of honour, eh?"
   "I won't show it to anyone," said the prince.
   "The letter is not sealed-" continued Gania, and paused in confusion.
   "Oh, I won't read it," said the prince, quite simply.
   He took up the portrait, and went out of the room.
   Gania, left alone, clutched his head with his hands.
   "One word from her," he said, "one word from her, and I may yet be free."
   He could not settle himself to his papers again, for agitation and excitement
, but began walking up and down the room from corner to corner.
   The prince walked along, musing. He did not like his commission, and disliked
 the idea of Gania sending a note to Aglaya at all; but when he was two rooms di
stant from the drawing-room, where they all were, he stopped a though recalling 
something; went to the window, nearer the light, and began to examine the portra
it in his hand.
   He longed to solve the mystery of something in the face Nastasia Philipovna, 
something which had struck him as he looked at the portrait for the first time; 
the impression had not left him. It was partly the fact of her marvellous beauty
 that struck him, and partly something else. There was a suggestion of immense p
ride and disdain in the face almost of hatred, and at the same time something co
nfiding and very full of simplicity. The contrast aroused a deep sympathy in his
 heart as he looked at the lovely face. The blinding loveliness of it was almost
 intolerable, this pale thin face with its flaming eyes; it was a strange beauty
.
   The prince gazed at it for a minute or two, then glanced around him, and hurr
iedly raised the portrait to his lips. When, a minute after, he reached the draw
ing-room door, his face was quite composed. But just as he reached the door he m
et Aglaya coming out alone.
   "Gavrila Ardalionovitch begged me to give you this," he said, handing her the
 note.
   Aglaya stopped, took the letter, and gazed strangely into the prince's eyes. 
There was no confusion in her face; a little surprise, perhaps, but that was all
. By her look she seemed merely to challenge the prince to an explanation as to 
how he and Gania happened to be connected in this matter. But her expression was
 perfectly cool and quiet, and even condescending.
   So they stood for a moment or two, confronting one another. At length a faint
 smile passed over her face, and she passed by him without a word.
   Mrs. Epanchin examined the portrait of Nastasia Philipovna for some little wh
ile, holding it critically at arm's length.
   "Yes, she is pretty," she said at last, "even very pretty. I have seen her tw
ice, but only at a distance. So you admire this kind of beauty, do you?" she ask
ed the prince, suddenly.
   "Yes, I do-this kind."
   "Do you mean especially this kind?"
   "Yes, especially this kind."
   "Why?"
   "There is much suffering in this face," murmured the prince, more as though t
alking to himself than answering the question.
   "I think you are wandering a little, prince," Mrs. Epanchin decided, after a 
lengthened survey of his face; and she tossed the portrait on to the table, haug
htily.
   Alexandra took it, and Adelaida came up, and both the girls examined the phot
ograph. Just then Aglaya entered the room.
   "What a power!" cried Adelaida suddenly, as she earnestly examined the portra
it over her sister's shoulder.
   "Whom? What power?" asked her mother, crossly.
   "Such beauty is real power," said Adelaida. "With such beauty as that one mig
ht overthrow the world." She returned to her easel thoughtfully.
   Aglaya merely glanced at the portrait-frowned, and put out her underlip; then
 went and sat down on the sofa with folded hands.
   Mrs. Epanchin rang the bell.
   "Ask Gavrila Ardalionovitch to step this way," said she to the man who answer
ed.
   "Mamma!" cried Alexandra, significantly.
   "I shall just say two words to him, that's all," said her mother, silencing a
ll objection by her manner; she was evidently seriously put out. "You see, princ
e, it is all secrets with us, just now-all secrets. It seems to be the etiquette
 of the house, for some reason or, other. Stupid nonsense, and in a matter which
 ought to be approached with all candour and openheartedness. There is a marriag
e being talked of, and I don't like this marriage-"
   "Mamma, what are you saying?" said Alexandra again, hurriedly.
   "Well, what, my dear girl? As if you can possibly like it yourself? The heart
 is the great thing, and the rest is all rubbish-though one must have sense as w
ell. Perhaps sense is really the great thing. Don't smile like that, Aglaya. I d
on't contradict myself. A fool with a heart and no brains is just as unhappy as 
a fool with brains and no heart. I am one and you are the other, and therefore b
oth of us suffer, both of us are unhappy."
   "Why are you so unhappy, mother?" asked Adelaida, who alone of all the compan
y seemed to have preserved her good temper and spirits up to now.
   "In the first place, because of my carefully brought-up daughters," said Mrs.
 Epanchin, cuttingly; "and as that is the best reason I can give you we need not
 bother about any other at present. Enough of words, now! We shall see how both 
of you (I don't count Aglaya) will manage your business, and whether you, most r
evered Alexandra Ivanovna, will be happy with your fine mate."
   "Ah!" she added, as Gania suddenly entered the room, "here's another marrying
 subject. How do you do?" she continued, in response to Gania's bow; but she did
 not invite him to sit down.
   "You are going to be married?"
   "Married? how-what marriage?" murmured Gania, overwhelmed with confusion.
   "Are you about to take a wife? I ask,-if you prefer that expression."
   "No, no I-I-no!" said Gania, bringing out his lie with a telltale blush of sh
ame. He glanced keenly at Aglaya, who was sitting some way off, and dropped his 
eyes immediately.
   Aglaya gazed coldly, intently, and composedly at him, without taking her eyes
 off his face, and watched his confusion.
   "No? You say no, do you?" continued the pitiless Mrs. General.
   "Very well, I shall remember that you told me this Wednesday morning, in answ
er to my question, that you are not going to be married. What day is it, Wednesd
ay, isn't it?"
   "Yes, I think so!" said Adelaida.
   "You never know the day of the week; what's the day of the month?"
   "Twenty-seventh!" said Gania.
   "Twenty-seventh; very well. Good-bye now; you have a good deal to do, I'm sur
e, and I must dress and go out. Take your portrait.
   Give my respects to your unfortunate mother, Nina Alexandrovna.
   Au revoir, dear prince, come in and see us often, do; and I shall tell old Pr
incess Bielokonski about you. I shall go and see her on purpose. And listen, my 
dear boy, I feel sure that God has sent you to Petersburg from Switzerland on pu
rpose for me. Maybe you will have other things to do, besides, but you are sent 
chiefly for my sake, I feel sure of it. God sent you to me! Au revoir! Alexandra
, come with me, my dear."
   Mrs. Epanchin left the room.
   Gania-confused, annoyed, furious-took up his portrait, and turned to the prin
ce with a nasty smile on his face.
   "Prince," he said, "I am just going home. If you have not changed your mind a
s to living with us, perhaps you would like to come with me. You don't know the 
address, I believe?"
   "Wait a minute, prince," said Aglaya, suddenly rising from her seat, "do writ
e something in my album first, will you? Father says you are a most talented cal
igraphist; I'll bring you my book in a minute." She left the room.
   "Well, au revoir, prince," said Adelaida, "I must be going too."
   She pressed the prince's hand warmly, and gave him a friendly smile as she le
ft the room. She did not so much as look at Gania.
   "This is your doing, prince," said Gania, turning on the latter so soon as th
e others were all out of the room. "This is your doing, sir! YOU have been telli
ng them that I am going to be married!" He said this in a hurried whisper, his e
yes flashing with rage and his face ablaze. "You shameless tattler!"
   "I assure you, you are under a delusion," said the prince, calmly and politel
y. "I did not even know that you were to be married."
   "You heard me talking about it, the general and me. You heard me say that eve
rything was to be settled today at Nastasia Philipovna's, and you went and blurt
ed it out here. You lie if you deny it. Who else could have told them Devil take
 it, sir, who could have told them except yourself? Didn't the old woman as good
 as hint as much to me?"
   "If she hinted to you who told her you must know best, of course; but I never
 said a word about it."
   "Did you give my note? Is there an answer?" interrupted Gania, impatiently.
   But at this moment Aglaya came back, and the prince had no time to reply.
   "There, prince," said she, "there's my album. Now choose a page and write me 
something, will you? There's a pen, a new one; do you mind a steel one? I have h
eard that you caligraphists don't like steel pens."
   Conversing with the prince, Aglaya did not even seem to notice that Gania was
 in the room. But while the prince was getting his pen ready, finding a page, an
d making his preparations to write, Gania came up to the fireplace where Aglaya 
was standing, to the right of the prince, and in trembling, broken accents said,
 almost in her ear:
   "One word, just one word from you, and I'm saved."
   The prince turned sharply round and looked at both of them.
   Gania's face was full of real despair; he seemed to have said the words almos
t unconsciously and on the impulse of the moment.
   Aglaya gazed at him for some seconds with precisely the same composure and ca
lm astonishment as she had shown a little while before, when the prince handed h
er the note, and it appeared that this calm surprise and seemingly absolute inco
mprehension of what was said to her, were more terribly overwhelming to Gania th
an even the most plainly expressed disdain would have been.
   "What shall I write?" asked the prince.
   "I'll dictate to you," said Aglaya, coming up to the table. "Now then, are yo
u ready? Write, 'I never condescend to bargain!' Now put your name and the date.
 Let me see it."
   The prince handed her the album.
   "Capital! How beautifully you have written it! Thanks so much. Au revoir, pri
nce. Wait a minute,"; she added, "I want to give you something for a keepsake. C
ome with me this way, will you?"
   The prince followed her. Arrived at the dining-room, she stopped.
   "Read this," she said, handing him Gania's note.
   The prince took it from her hand, but gazed at her in bewilderment.
   "Oh! I KNOW you haven't read it, and that you could never be that man's accom
plice. Read it, I wish you to read it."
   The letter had evidently been written in a hurry:
   "My fate is to be decided today" (it ran), "you know how. This day I must giv
e my word irrevocably. I have no right to ask your help, and I dare not allow my
self to indulge in any hopes; but once you said just one word, and that word lig
hted up the night of my life, and became the beacon of my days. Say one more suc
h word, and save me from utter ruin. Only tell me, 'break off the whole thing!' 
and I will do so this very day. Oh! what can it cost you to say just this one wo
rd? In doing so you will but be giving me a sign of your sympathy for me, and of
 your pity; only this, only this; nothing more, NOTHING. I dare not indulge in a
ny hope, because I am unworthy of it. But if you say but this word, I will take 
up my cross again with joy, and return once more to my battle with poverty. I sh
all meet the storm and be glad of it;
   I shall rise up with renewed strength.
   "Send me back then this one word of sympathy, only sympathy, I swear to you; 
and oh! do not be angry with the audacity of despair, with the drowning man who 
has dared to make this last effort to save himself from perishing beneath the wa
ters.
      "G.L."
   "This man assures me," said Aglaya, scornfully, when the prince had finished 
reading the letter, "that the words 'break off everything' do not commit me to a
nything whatever; and himself gives me a written guarantee to that effect, in th
is letter.
   Observe how ingenuously he underlines certain words, and how crudely he gloss
es over his hidden thoughts. He must know that if he 'broke off everything,' FIR
ST, by himself, and without telling me a word about it or having the slightest h
ope on my account, that in that case I should perhaps be able to change my opini
on of him, and even accept his-friendship. He must know that, but his soul is su
ch a wretched thing. He knows it and cannot make up his mind; he knows it and ye
t asks for guarantees. He cannot bring himself to TRUST, he wants me to give him
 hopes of myself before he lets go of his hundred thousand roubles. As to the 'f
ormer word' which he declares 'lighted up the night of his life,' he is simply a
n impudent liar; I merely pitied him once.
   But he is audacious and shameless. He immediately began to hope, at that very
 moment. I saw it. He has tried to catch me ever since; he is still fishing for 
me. Well, enough of this. Take the letter and give it back to him, as soon as yo
u have left our house; not before, of course."
   "And what shall I tell him by way of answer?"
   "Nothing-of course! That's the best answer. Is it the case that you are going
 to live in his house?"
   "Yes, your father kindly recommended me to him."
   "Then look out for him, I warn you! He won't forgive you easily, for taking b
ack the letter."
   Aglaya pressed the prince's hand and left the room. Her face was serious and 
frowning; she did not even smile as she nodded goodbye to him at the door.
   "I'll just get my parcel and we'll go," said the prince to Gania, as he re-en
tered the drawing-room. Gania stamped his foot with impatience. His face looked 
dark and gloomy with rage.
   At last they left the house behind them, the prince carrying his bundle.
   "The answer-quick-the answer!" said Gania, the instant they were outside. "Wh
at did she say? Did you give the letter?" The prince silently held out the note.
 Gania was struck motionless with amazement.
   "How, what? my letter?" he cried. "He never delivered it! I might have guesse
d it, oh! curse him! Of course she did not understand what I meant, naturally! W
hy-why-WHY didn't you give her the note, you-"
   "Excuse me; I was able to deliver it almost immediately after receiving your 
commission, and I gave it, too, just as you asked me to. It has come into my han
ds now because Aglaya Ivanovna has just returned it to me."
   "How? When?"
   "As soon as I finished writing in her album for her, and when she asked me to
 come out of the room with her (you heard?), we went into the dining-room, and s
he gave me your letter to read, and then told me to return it."
   "To READ?" cried Gania, almost at the top of his voice; "to READ, and you rea
d it?"
   And again he stood like a log in the middle of the pavement; so amazed that h
is mouth remained open after the last word had left it.
   "Yes, I have just read it."
   "And she gave it you to read herself-HERSELF?"
   "Yes, herself; and you may believe me when I tell you that I would not have r
ead it for anything without her permission."
   Gania was silent for a minute or two, as though thinking out some problem. Su
ddenly he cried:
   "It's impossible, she cannot have given it to you to read! You are lying. You
 read it yourself!"
   "I am telling you the truth," said the prince in his former composed tone of 
voice; "and believe me, I am extremely sorry that the circumstance should have m
ade such an unpleasant impression upon you!"
   "But, you wretched man, at least she must have said something?
   There must be SOME answer from her!"
   "Yes, of course, she did say something!"
   "Out with it then, damn it! Out with it at once!" and Gania stamped his foot 
twice on the pavement.
   "As soon as I had finished reading it, she told me that you were fishing for 
her; that you wished to compromise her so far as to receive some hopes from her,
 trusting to which hopes you might break with the prospect of receiving a hundre
d thousand roubles.
   She said that if you had done this without bargaining with her, if you had br
oken with the money prospects without trying to force a guarantee out of her fir
st, she might have been your friend. That's all, I think. Oh no, when I asked he
r what I was to say, as I took the letter, she replied that 'no answer is the be
st answer.' I think that was it. Forgive me if I do not use her exact expression
s. I tell you the sense as I understood it myself."
   Ungovernable rage and madness took entire possession of Gania, and his fury b
urst out without the least attempt at restraint.
   "Oh! that's it, is it!" he yelled. "She throws my letters out of the window, 
does she! Oh! and she does not condescend to bargain, while I DO, eh? We shall s
ee, we shall see! I shall pay her out for this."
   He twisted himself about with rage, and grew paler and paler; he shook his fi
st. So the pair walked along a few steps. Gania did not stand on ceremony with t
he prince; he behaved just as though he were alone in his room. He clearly count
ed the latter as a nonentity. But suddenly he seemed to have an idea, and recoll
ected himself.
   "But how was it?" he asked, "how was it that you (idiot that you are)," he ad
ded to himself, "were so very confidential a couple of hours after your first me
eting with these people? How was that, eh?"
   Up to this moment jealousy had not been one of his torments; now it suddenly 
gnawed at his heart.
   "That is a thing I cannot undertake to explain," replied the prince. Gania lo
oked at him with angry contempt.
   "Oh! I suppose the present she wished to make to you, when she took you into 
the dining-room, was her confidence, eh?"
   "I suppose that was it; I cannot explain it otherwise?"
   "But why, WHY? Devil take it, what did you do in there? Why did they fancy yo
u? Look here, can't you remember exactly what you said to them, from the very be
ginning? Can't you remember?"
   "Oh, we talked of a great many things. When first I went in we began to speak
 of Switzerland."
   "Oh, the devil take Switzerland!"
   "Then about executions."
   "Executions?"
   "Yes-at least about one. Then I told the whole three years' story of my life,
 and the history of a poor peasant girl-"
   "Oh, damn the peasant girl! go on, go on!" said Gania, impatiently.
   "Then how Schneider told me about my childish nature, and-"
   "Oh, CURSE Schneider and his dirty opinions! Go on."
   "Then I began to talk about faces, at least about the EXPRESSIONS of faces, a
nd said that Aglaya Ivanovna was nearly as lovely as Nastasia Philipovna. It was
 then I blurted out about the portrait-"
   "But you didn't repeat what you heard in the study? You didn't repeat that-eh
?"
   "No, I tell you I did NOT."
   "Then how did they-look here! Did Aglaya show my letter to the old lady?"
   "Oh, there I can give you my fullest assurance that she did NOT.
   I was there all the while-she had no time to do it!"
   "But perhaps you may not have observed it, oh, you damned idiot, you!" he sho
uted, quite beside himself with fury. "You can't even describe what went on."
   Gania having once descended to abuse, and receiving no check, very soon knew 
no bounds or limit to his licence, as is often the way in such cases. His rage s
o blinded him that he had not even been able to detect that this "idiot," whom h
e was abusing to such an extent, was very far from being slow of comprehension, 
and had a way of taking in an impression, and afterwards giving it out again, wh
ich was very un-idiotic indeed. But something a little unforeseen now occurred.
   "I think I ought to tell you, Gavrila Ardalionovitch," said the prince, sudde
nly, "that though I once was so ill that I really was little better than an idio
t, yet now I am almost recovered, and that, therefore, it is not altogether plea
sant to be called an idiot to my face. Of course your anger is excusable, consid
ering the treatment you have just experienced; but I must remind you that you ha
ve twice abused me rather rudely. I do not like this sort of thing, and especial
ly so at the first time of meeting a man, and, therefore, as we happen to be at 
this moment standing at a crossroad, don't you think we had better part, you to 
the left, homewards, and I to the right, here? I have twentyfive roubles, and I 
shall easily find a lodging."
   Gania was much confused, and blushed for shame "Do forgive me, prince!" he cr
ied, suddenly changing his abusive tone for one of great courtesy. "For Heaven's
 sake, forgive me! You see what a miserable plight I am in, but you hardly know 
anything of the facts of the case as yet. If you did, I am sure you would forgiv
e me, at least partially. Of course it was inexcusable of me, I know, but-"
   "Oh, dear me, I really do not require such profuse apologies," replied the pr
ince, hastily. "I quite understand how unpleasant your position is, and that is 
what made you abuse me. So come along to your house, after all. I shall be delig
hted-"
   "I am not going to let him go like this," thought Gania, glancing angrily at 
the prince as they walked along. " The fellow has sucked everything out of me, a
nd now he takes off his mask-there's something more than appears, here we shall 
see. It shall all be as clear as water by tonight, everything!"
   But by this time they had reached Gania's house.
      VIII.
   The flat occupied by Gania and his family was on the third floor of the house
. It was reached by a clean light staircase, and consisted of seven rooms, a nic
e enough lodging, and one would have thought a little too good for a clerk on tw
o thousand roubles a year. But it was designed to accommodate a few lodgers on b
oard terms, and had beer) taken a few months since, much to the disgust of Gania
, at the urgent request of his mother and his sister, Varvara Ardalionovna, who 
longed to do something to increase the family income a little, and fixed their h
opes upon letting lodgings. Gania frowned upon the idea. He thought it infra dig
, and did not quite like appearing in society afterwards-that society in which h
e had been accustomed to pose up to now as a young man of rather brilliant prosp
ects. All these concessions and rebuffs of fortune, of late, had wounded his spi
rit severely, and his temper had become extremely irritable, his wrath being gen
erally quite out of proportion to the cause.
   But if he had made up his mind to put up with this sort of life for a while, 
it was only on the plain understanding with his inner self that he would very so
on change it all, and have things as he chose again. Yet the very means by which
 he hoped to make this change threatened to involve him in even greater difficul
ties than he had had before.
   The flat was divided by a passage which led straight out of the entrance-hall
. Along one side of this corridor lay the three rooms which were designed for th
e accommodation of the "highly recommended" lodgers. Besides these three rooms t
here was another small one at the end of the passage, close to the kitchen, whic
h was allotted to General Ivolgin, the nominal master of the house, who slept on
 a wide sofa, and was obliged to pass into and out of his room through the kitch
en, and up or down the back stairs. Colia, Gania's young brother, a school-boy o
f thirteen, shared this room with his father.
   He, too, had to sleep on an old sofa, a narrow, uncomfortable thing with a to
rn rug over it; his chief duty being to look after his father, who needed to be 
watched more and more every day.
   The prince was given the middle room of the three, the first being occupied b
y one Ferdishenko, while the third was empty.
   But Gania first conducted the prince to the family apartments.
   These consisted of a "salon," which became the dining-room when required; a d
rawing-room, which was only a drawing-room in the morning, and became Gania's st
udy in the evening, and his bedroom at night; and lastly Nina Alexandrovna's and
 Varvara's bedroom, a small, close chamber which they shared together.
   In a word, the whole place was confined, and a "tight fit" for the party. Gan
ia used to grind his teeth with rage over the state of affairs; though he was an
xious to be dutiful and polite to his mother. However, it was very soon apparent
 to anyone coming into the house, that Gania was the tyrant of the family.
   Nina Alexandrovna and her daughter were both seated in the drawing-room, enga
ged in knitting, and talking to a visitor, Ivan Petrovitch Ptitsin.
   The lady of the house appeared to be a woman of about fifty years of age, thi
n-faced, and with black lines under the eves. She looked ill and rather sad; but
 her face was a pleasant one for all that; and from the first word that fell fro
m her lips, any stranger would at once conclude that she was of a serious and pa
rticularly sincere nature. In spite of her sorrowful expression, she gave the id
ea of possessing considerable firmness and decision.
   Her dress was modest and simple to a degree, dark and elderly in style; but b
oth her face and appearance gave evidence that she had seen better days.
   Varvara was a girl of some twenty-three summers, of middle height, thin, but 
possessing a face which, without being actually beautiful, had the rare quality 
of charm, and might fascinate even to the extent of passionate regard.
   She was very like her mother: she even dressed like her, which proved that sh
e had no taste for smart clothes. The expression of her grey eyes was merry and 
gentle, when it was not, as lately, too full of thought and anxiety. The same de
cision and firmness was to be observed in her face as in her mother's, but her s
trength seemed to be more vigorous than that of Nina Alexandrovna. She was subje
ct to outbursts of temper, of which even her brother was a little afraid.
   The present visitor, Ptitsin, was also afraid of her. This was a young fellow
 of something under thirty, dressed plainly, but neatly. His manners were good, 
but rather ponderously so. His dark beard bore evidence to the fact that he was 
not in any government employ. He could speak well, but preferred silence. On the
 whole he made a decidedly agreeable impression. He was clearly attracted by Var
vara, and made no secret of his feelings.
   She trusted him in a friendly way, but had not shown him any decided encourag
ement as yet, which fact did not quell his ardour in the least.
   Nina Alexandrovna was very fond of him, and had grown quite confidential with
 him of late. Ptitsin, as was well known, was engaged in the business of lending
 out money on good security, and at a good rate of interest. He was a great frie
nd of Gania's.
   After a formal introduction by Gania (who greeted his mother very shortly, to
ok no notice of his sister, and immediately marched Ptitsin out of the room), Ni
na Alexandrovna addressed a few kind words to the prince and forthwith requested
 Colia, who had just appeared at the door, to show him to the " middle room."
   Colia was a nice-looking boy. His expression was simple and confiding, and hi
s manners were very polite and engaging.
   "Where's your luggage?" he asked, as he led the prince away to his room.
   "I had a bundle; it's in the entrance hall."
   "I'll bring it you directly. We only have a cook and one maid, so I have to h
elp as much as I can. Varia looks after things, generally, and loses her temper 
over it. Gania says you have only just arrived from Switzerland? "
   "Yes."
   "Is it jolly there?"
   "Very."
   "Mountains?"
   "Yes."
   "I'll go and get your bundle."
   Here Varvara joined them.
   "The maid shall bring your bed-linen directly. Have you a portmanteau?"
   "No; a bundle-your brother has just gone to the hall for it."
   "There's nothing there except this," said Colia, returning at this moment. "W
here did you put it?"
   "Oh! but that's all I have," said the prince, taking it.
   "Ah! I thought perhaps Ferdishenko had taken it."
   "Don't talk nonsense," said Varia, severely. She seemed put out, and was only
 just polite with the prince.
   "Oho!" laughed the boy, "you can be nicer than that to ME, you know-I'm not P
titsin!"
   "You ought to be whipped, Colia, you silly boy. If you want anything" (to the
 prince) "please apply to the servant. We dine at half-past four. You can take y
our dinner with us, or have it in your room, just as you please. Come along, Col
ia, don't disturb the prince."
   At the door they met Gania coming in.
   "Is father in?" he asked. Colia whispered something in his ear and went out.
   "Just a couple of words, prince, if you'll excuse me. Don't blab over THERE a
bout what you may see here, or in this house as to all that about Aglaya and me,
 you know. Things are not altogether pleasant in this establishment-devil take i
t all! You'll see. At all events keep your tongue to yourself for TODAY."
   "I assure you I 'blabbed' a great deal less than you seem to suppose," said t
he prince, with some annoyance. Clearly the relations between Gania and himself 
were by no means improving.
   "Oh I well; I caught it quite hot enough today, thanks to you.
   However, I forgive you."
   "I think you might fairly remember that I was not in any way bound, I had no 
reason to be silent about that portrait. You never asked me not to mention it."
   "Pfu! what a wretched room this is-dark, and the window looking into the yard
. Your coming to our house is, in no respect, opportune. However, it's not MY af
fair. I don't keep the lodgings."
   Ptitsin here looked in and beckoned to Gania, who hastily left the room, in s
pite of the fact that he had evidently wished to say something more and had only
 made the remark about the room to gain time. The prince had hardly had time to 
wash and tidy himself a little when the door opened once more, and another figur
e appeared.
   This was a gentleman of about thirty, tall, broadshouldered, and red-haired; 
his face was red, too, and he possessed a pair of thick lips, a wide nose, small
 eyes, rather bloodshot, and with an ironical expression in them; as though he w
ere perpetually winking at someone. His whole appearance gave one the idea of im
pudence; his dress was shabby.
   He opened the door just enough to let his head in. His head remained so place
d for a few seconds while he quietly scrutinized the room; the door then opened 
enough to admit his body; but still he did not enter. He stood on the threshold 
and examined the prince carefully. At last he gave the door a final shove, enter
ed, approached the prince, took his hand and seated himself and the owner of the
 room on two chairs side by side.
   "Ferdishenko," he said, gazing intently and inquiringly into the prince's eye
s.
   "Very well, what next?" said the latter, almost laughing in his face.
   "A lodger here," continued the other, staring as before.
   "Do you wish to make acquaintance?" asked the prince.
   "Ah!" said the visitor, passing his fingers through his hair and sighing. He 
then looked over to the other side of the room and around it. "Got any money?" h
e asked, suddenly.
   "Not much."
   "How much?"
   "Twenty-five roubles."
   "Let's see it."
   The prince took his banknote out and showed it to Ferdishenko.
   The latter unfolded it and looked at it; then he turned it round and examined
 the other side; then he held it up to the light.
   "How strange that it should have browned so," he said, reflectively. "These t
wenty-five rouble notes brown in a most extraordinary way, while other notes oft
en grow paler. Take it."
   The prince took his note. Ferdishenko rose.
   "I came here to warn you," he said. "In the first place, don't lend me any mo
ney, for I shall certainly ask you to."
   "Very well."
   "Shall you pay here?"
   "Yes, I intend to."
   "Oh! I DON'T intend to. Thanks. I live here, next door to you; you noticed a 
room, did you? Don't come to me very often; I shall see you here quite often eno
ugh. Have you seen the general?"
   "No."
   "Nor heard him?"
   "No; of course not."
   "Well, you'll both hear and see him soon; he even tries to borrow money from 
me. Avis au lecteur. Good-bye; do you think a man can possibly live with a name 
like Ferdishenko?"
   "Why not?"
   "Good-bye."
   And so he departed. The prince found out afterwards that this gentleman made 
it his business to amaze people with his originality and wit, but that it did no
t as a rule "come off." He even produced a bad impression on some people, which 
grieved him sorely; but he did not change his ways for all that.
   As he went out of the prince's room, he collided with yet another visitor com
ing in. Ferdishenko took the opportunity of making several warning gestures to t
he prince from behind the new arrival's back, and left the room in conscious pri
de.
   This next arrival was a tall red-faced man of about fifty-five, with greyish 
hair and whiskers, and large eyes which stood out of their sockets. His appearan
ce would have been distinguished had it not been that he gave the idea of being 
rather dirty. He was dressed in an old coat, and he smelled of vodka when he cam
e near. His walk was effective, and he clearly did his best to appear dignified,
 and to impress people by his manner.
   This gentleman now approached the prince slowly, and with a most courteous sm
ile; silently took his hand and held it in his own, as he examined the prince's 
features as though searching for familiar traits therein.
   "'Tis he, 'tis he!" he said at last, quietly, but with much solemnity. "As th
ough he were alive once more. I heard the familiar name-the dear familiar name-a
nd, oh. I how it reminded me of the irrevocable past-Prince Muishkin, I believe?
"
   "Exactly so."
   "General Ivolgin-retired and unfortunate. May I ask your Christian and generi
c names?"
   "Lef Nicolaievitch."
   "So, so-the son of my old, I may say my childhood's friend, Nicolai Petrovitc
h."
   "My father's name was Nicolai Lvovitch."
   "Lvovitch," repeated the general without the slightest haste, and with perfec
t confidence, just as though he had not committed himself the least in the world
, but merely made a little slip of the tongue. He sat down, and taking the princ
e's hand, drew him to a seat next to himself.
   "I carried you in my arms as a baby," he observed.
   "Really?" asked the prince. "Why, it's twenty years since my father died."
   "Yes, yes-twenty years and three months. We were educated together; I went st
raight into the army, and he-"
   "My father went into the army, too. He was a sub-lieutenant in the Vasiliefsk
y regiment."
   "No, sir-in the Bielomirsky; he changed into the latter shortly before his de
ath. I was at his bedside when he died, and gave him my blessing for eternity. Y
our mother-" The general paused, as though overcome with emotion.
   "She died a few months later, from a cold," said the prince.
   "Oh, not cold-believe an old man-not from a cold, but from grief for her prin
ce. Oh-your mother, your mother! heigh-ho!
   Youth-youth! Your father and I-old friends as we were-nearly murdered each ot
her for her sake."
   The prince began to be a little incredulous.
   "I was passionately in love with her when she was engaged-engaged to my frien
d. The prince noticed the fact and was furious. He came and woke me at seven o'c
lock one morning. I rise and dress in amazement; silence on both sides. I unders
tand it all. He takes a couple of pistols out of his pocket-across a handkerchie
f-without witnesses. Why invite witnesses when both of us would be walking in et
ernity in a couple of minutes? The pistols are loaded; we stretch the handkerchi
ef and stand opposite one another. We aim the pistols at each other's hearts.
   Suddenly tears start to our eyes, our hands shake; we weep, we embrace-the ba
ttle is one of self-sacrifice now! The prince shouts, 'She is yours;' I cry, 'Sh
e is yours-' in a word, in a word-You've come to live with us, hey?"
   "Yes-yes-for a while, I think," stammered the prince.
   "Prince, mother begs you to come to her," said Colia, appearing at the door.
   The prince rose to go, but the general once more laid his hand in a friendly 
manner on his shoulder, and dragged him down on to the sofa.
   "As the true friend of your father, I wish to say a few words to you," he beg
an. "I have suffered-there was a catastrophe. I suffered without a trial; I had 
no trial. Nina Alexandrovna my wife, is an excellent woman, so is my daughter Va
rvara. We have to let lodgings because we are poor-a dreadful, unheard-of comedo
wn for us-for me, who should have been a governor-general; but we are very glad 
to have YOU, at all events. Meanwhile there is a tragedy in the house."
   The prince looked inquiringly at the other.
   "Yes, a marriage is being arranged-a marriage between a questionable woman an
d a young fellow who might be a flunkey.
   They wish to bring this woman into the house where my wife and daughter resid
e, but while I live and breathe she shall never enter my doors. I shall lie at t
he threshold, and she shall trample me underfoot if she does. I hardly talk to G
ania now, and avoid him as much as I can. I warn you of this beforehand, but you
 cannot fail to observe it. But you are the son of my old friend, and I hope-"
   "Prince, be so kind as to come to me for a moment in the drawingroom," said N
ina Alexandrovna herself, appearing at the door.
   "Imagine, my dear," cried the general, "it turns out that I have nursed the p
rince on my knee in the old days." His wife looked searchingly at him, and glanc
ed at the prince, but said nothing.
   The prince rose and followed her; but hardly had they reached the drawing-roo
m, and Nina Alexandrovna had begun to talk hurriedly, when in came the general. 
She immediately relapsed into silence.
   The master of the house may have observed this, but at all events he did not 
take any notice of it; he was in high good humour.
   "A son of my old friend, dear," he cried; "surely you must remember Prince Ni
colai Lvovitch? You saw him at-at Tver."
   "I don't remember any Nicolai Lvovitch, Was that your father?" she inquired o
f the prince.
   "Yes, but he died at Elizabethgrad, not at Tver," said the prince, rather tim
idly. "So Pavlicheff told me."
   "No, Tver," insisted the general; "he removed just before his death. You were
 very small and cannot remember; and Pavlicheff, though an excellent fellow, may
 have made a mistake."
   "You knew Pavlicheff then?"
   "Oh, yes-a wonderful fellow; but I was present myself. I gave him my blessing
."
   "My father was just about to be tried when he died," said the prince, "althou
gh I never knew of what he was accused. He died in hospital."
   "Oh! it was the Kolpakoff business, and of course he would have been acquitte
d."
   "Yes? Do you know that for a fact?" asked the prince, whose curiosity was aro
used by the general's words.
   "I should think so indeed!" cried the latter. "The court-martial came to no d
ecision. It was a mysterious, an impossible business, one might say! Captain Lar
ionoff, commander of the company, had died; his command was handed over to the p
rince for the moment.
   Very well. This soldier, Kolpakoff, stole some leather from one of his comrad
es, intending to sell it, and spent the money on drink. Well! The prince-you und
erstand that what follows took place in the presence of the sergeant-major, and 
a corporal-the prince rated Kolpakoff soundly, and threatened to have him flogge
d. Well, Kolpakoff went back to the barracks, lay down on a camp bedstead, and i
n a quarter of an hour was dead: you quite understand? It was, as I said, a stra
nge, almost impossible, affair. In due course Kolpakoff was buried; the prince w
rote his report, the deceased's name was removed from the roll. All as it should
 be, is it not? But exactly three months later at the inspection of the brigade,
 the man Kolpakoff was found in the third company of the second battalion of inf
antry, Novozemlianski division, just as if nothing had happened!"
   "What?" said the prince, much astonished.
   "It did not occur-it's a mistake!" said Nina Alexandrovna quickly, looking, a
t the prince rather anxiously. "Mon mari se trompe," she added, speaking in Fren
ch.
   "My dear, 'se trompe' is easily said. Do you remember any case at all like it
? Everybody was at their wits' end. I should be the first to say 'qu'on se tromp
e,' but unfortunately I was an eyewitness, and was also on the commission of inq
uiry. Everything proved that it was really he, the very same soldier Kolpakoff w
ho had been given the usual military funeral to the sound of the drum. It is of 
course a most curious case-nearly an impossible one. I recognize that but-"
   "Father, your dinner is ready," said Varvara at this point, putting her head 
in at the door.
   "Very glad, I'm particularly hungry. Yes, yes, a strange coincidence-almost a
 psychological-"
   "Your soup'll be cold; do come."
   "Coming, coming " said the general. "Son of my old friend-" he was heard mutt
ering as he went down the passage.
   "You will have to excuse very much in my husband, if you stay with us," said 
Nina Alexandrovna; "but he will not disturb you often. He dines alone. Everyone 
has his little peculiarities, you know, and some people perhaps have more than t
hose who are most pointed at and laughed at. One thing I must beg of you-if my h
usband applies to you for payment for board and lodging, tell him that you have 
already paid me. Of course anything paid by you to the general would be as fully
 settled as if paid to me, so far as you are concerned; but I wish it to be so, 
if you please, for convenience' sake. What is it, Varia?"
   Varia had quietly entered the room, and was holding out the portrait of Nasta
sia Philipovna to her mother.
   Nina Alexandrovna started, and examined the photograph intently, gazing at it
 long and sadly. At last she looked up inquiringly at Varia.
   "It's a present from herself to him," said Varia; "the question is to be fina
lly decided this evening."
   "This evening!" repeated her mother in a tone of despair, but softly, as thou
gh to herself. "Then it's all settled, of course, and there's no hope left to us
. She has anticipated her answer by the present of her portrait. Did he show it 
you himself?" she added, in some surprise.
   "You know we have hardly spoken to each other for a whole month.
   Ptitsin told me all about it; and the photo was lying under the table, and I 
picked it up."
   "Prince," asked Nina Alexandrovna, "I wanted to inquire whether you have know
n my son long? I think he said that you had only arrived today from somewhere."
   The prince gave a short narrative of what we have heard before, leaving out t
he greater part. The two ladies listened intently.
   "I did not ask about Gania out of curiosity," said the elder, at last. "I wis
h to know how much you know about him, because he said just now that we need not
 stand on ceremony with you. What, exactly, does that mean?"
   At this moment Gania and Ptitsin entered the room together, and Nina Alexandr
ovna immediately became silent again. The prince remained seated next to her, bu
t Varia moved to the other end of the room; the portrait of Nastasia Philipovna 
remained lying as before on the work-table. Gania observed it there, and with a 
frown of annoyance snatched it up and threw it across to his writing-table, whic
h stood at the other end of the room.
   "Is it today, Gania?" asked Nina Alexandrovna, at last.
   "Is what today?" cried the former. Then suddenly recollecting himself, he tur
ned sharply on the prince. "Oh," he growled, "I see, you are here, that explains
 it! Is it a disease, or what, that you can't hold your tongue? Look here, under
stand once for all, prince-"
   "I am to blame in this, Gania-no one else," said Ptitsin.
   Gania glanced inquiringly at the speaker.
   "It's better so, you know, Gania-especially as, from one point of view, the m
atter may be considered as settled," said Ptitsin; and sitting down a little way
 from the table he began to study a paper covered with pencil writing.
   Gania stood and frowned, he expected a family scene. He never thought of apol
ogizing to the prince, however.
   "If it's all settled, Gania, then of course Mr. Ptitsin is right," said Nina 
Alexandrovna. "Don't frown. You need not worry yourself, Gania; I shall ask you 
no questions. You need not tell me anything you don't like. I assure you I have 
quite submitted to your will." She said all this, knitting away the while as tho
ugh perfectly calm and composed.
   Gania was surprised, but cautiously kept silence and looked at his mother, ho
ping that she would express herself more clearly.
   Nina Alexandrovna observed his cautiousness and added, with a bitter smile:
   "You are still suspicious, I see, and do not believe me; but you may be quite
 at your ease. There shall be no more tears, nor questions-not from my side, at 
all events. All I wish is that you may be happy, you know that. I have submitted
 to my fate; but my heart will always be with you, whether we remain united, or 
whether we part. Of course I only answer for myself-you can hardly expect your s
ister-"
   "My sister again," cried Gania, looking at her with contempt and almost hate.
 "Look here, mother, I have already given you my word that I shall always respec
t you fully and absolutely, and so shall everyone else in this house, be it who 
it may, who shall cross this threshold."
   Gania was so much relieved that he gazed at his mother almost affectionately.
   "I was not at all afraid for myself, Gania, as you know well. It was not for 
my own sake that I have been so anxious and worried all this time! They say it i
s all to be settled to-day. What is to be settled?"
   "She has promised to tell me tonight at her own house whether she consents or
 not," replied Gania.
   "We have been silent on this subject for three weeks," said his mother, "and 
it was better so; and now I will only ask you one question. How can she give her
 consent and make you a present of her portrait when you do not love her? How ca
n such a-such a-"
   "Practised hand-eh?"
   "I was not going to express myself so. But how could you so blind her?"
   Nina Alexandrovna's question betrayed intense annoyance. Gania waited a momen
t and then said, without taking the trouble to conceal the irony of his tone:
   "There you are, mother, you are always like that. You begin by promising that
 there are to be no reproaches or insinuations or questions, and here you are be
ginning them at once. We had better drop the subject-we had, really. I shall nev
er leave you, mother; any other man would cut and run from such a sister as this
. See how she is looking at me at this moment! Besides, how do you know that I a
m blinding Nastasia Philipovna? As for Varia, I don't care-she can do just as sh
e pleases. There, that's quite enough!"
   Gania's irritation increased with every word he uttered, as he walked up and 
down the room. These conversations always touched the family sores before long.
   "I have said already that the moment she comes in I go out, and I shall keep 
my word," remarked Varia.
   "Out of obstinacy" shouted Gania. "You haven't married, either, thanks to you
r obstinacy. Oh, you needn't frown at me, Varvara!
   You can go at once for all I care; I am sick enough of your company. What, yo
u are going to leave us are you, too?" he cried, turning to the prince, who was 
rising from his chair.
   Gania's voice was full of the most uncontrolled and uncontrollable irritation
.
   The prince turned at the door to say something, but perceiving in Gania's exp
ression that there was but that one drop wanting to make the cup overflow, he ch
anged his mind and left the room without a word. A few minutes later he was awar
e from the noisy voices in the drawing room, that the conversation had become mo
re quarrelsome than ever after his departure.
   He crossed the salon and the entrance-hall, so as to pass down the corridor i
nto his own room. As he came near the front door he heard someone outside vainly
 endeavouring to ring the bell, which was evidently broken, and only shook a lit
tle, without emitting any sound.
   The prince took down the chain and opened the door. He started back in amazem
ent-for there stood Nastasia Philipovna. He knew her at once from her photograph
. Her eyes blazed with anger as she looked at him. She quickly pushed by him int
o the hall, shouldering him out of her way, and said, furiously, as she threw of
f her fur cloak:
   "If you are too lazy to mend your bell, you should at least wait in the hall 
to let people in when they rattle the bell handle.
   There, now, you've dropped my fur cloak-dummy!"
   Sure enough the cloak was lying on the ground. Nastasia had thrown it off her
 towards the prince, expecting him to catch it, but the prince had missed it.
   "Now then-announce me, quick!"
   The prince wanted to say something, but was so confused and astonished that h
e could not. However, he moved off towards the drawing-room with the cloak over 
his arm.
   "Now then, where are you taking my cloak to? Ha, ha, ha! Are you mad?"
   The prince turned and came back, more confused than ever. When she burst out 
laughing, he smiled, but his tongue could not form a word as yet. At first, when
 he had opened the door and saw her standing before him, he had become as pale a
s death; but now the red blood had rushed back to his cheeks in a torrent.
   "Why, what an idiot it is!" cried Nastasia, stamping her foot with irritation
. "Go on, do! Whom are you going to announce?"
   "Nastasia Philipovna," murmured the prince.
   "And how do you know that?" she asked him, sharply.
   "I have never seen you before!"
   "Go on, announce me-what's that noise?"
   "They are quarrelling," said the prince, and entered the drawingroom, just as
 matters in there had almost reached a crisis. Nina Alexandrovna had forgotten t
hat she had "submitted to everything!" She was defending Varia. Ptitsin was taki
ng her part, too. Not that Varia was afraid of standing up for herself.
   She was by no means that sort of a girl; but her brother was becoming ruder a
nd more intolerable every moment. Her usual practice in such cases as the presen
t was to say nothing, but stare at him, without taking her eyes off his face for
 an instant. This manoeuvre, as she well knew, could drive Gania distracted.
   Just at this moment the door opened and the prince entered, announcing:
   "Nastasia Philipovna!"
      IX.
   Silence immediately fell on the room; all looked at the prince as though they
 neither understood, nor hoped to understand. Gania was motionless with horror.
   Nastasia's arrival was a most unexpected and overwhelming event to all partie
s. In the first place, she had never been before. Up to now she had been so haug
hty that she had never even asked Gania to introduce her to his parents. Of late
 she had not so much as mentioned them. Gania was partly glad of this; but still
 he had put it to her debit in the account to be settled after marriage.
   He would have borne anything from her rather than this visit. But one thing s
eemed to him quite clear-her visit now, and the present of her portrait on this 
particular day, pointed out plainly enough which way she intended to make her de
cision!
   The incredulous amazement with which all regarded the prince did not last lon
g, for Nastasia herself appeared at the door and passed in, pushing by the princ
e again.
   "At last I've stormed the citadel! Why do you tie up your bell?" she said, me
rrily, as she pressed Gania's hand, the latter having rushed up to her as soon a
s she made her appearance. "What are you looking so upset about? Introduce me, p
lease!"
   The bewildered Gania introduced her first to Varia, and both women, before sh
aking hands, exchanged looks of strange import.
   Nastasia, however, smiled amiably; but Varia did not try to look amiable, and
 kept her gloomy expression. She did not even vouchsafe the usual courteous smil
e of etiquette. Gania darted a terrible glance of wrath at her for this, but Nin
a Alexandrovna, mended matters a little when Gania introduced her at last.
   Hardly, however, had the old lady begun about her " highly gratified feelings
," and so on, when Nastasia left her, and flounced into a chair by Gania's side 
in the corner by the window, and cried: "Where's your study? and where are the-t
he lodgers? You do take in lodgers, don't you?"
   Gania looked dreadfully put out, and tried to say something in reply, but Nas
tasia interrupted him:
   "Why, where are you going to squeeze lodgers in here? Don't you use a study? 
Does this sort of thing pay?" she added, turning to Nina Alexandrovna.
   "Well, it is troublesome, rather," said the latter; "but I suppose it will 'p
ay' pretty well. We have only just begun, however-"
   Again Nastasia Philipovna did not hear the sentence out. She glanced at Gania
, and cried, laughing, "What a face! My goodness, what a face you have on at thi
s moment!"
   Indeed, Gania did not look in the least like himself. His bewilderment and hi
s alarmed perplexity passed off, however, and his lips now twitched with rage as
 he continued to stare evilly at his laughing guest, while his countenance becam
e absolutely livid.
   There was another witness, who, though standing at the door motionless and be
wildered himself, still managed to remark Gania's death-like pallor, and the dre
adful change that had come over his face. This witness was the prince, who now a
dvanced in alarm and muttered to Gania:
   "Drink some water, and don't look like that!"
   It was clear that he came out with these words quite spontaneously, on the sp
ur of the moment. But his speech was productive of much-for it appeared that all
. Gania's rage now overflowed upon the prince. He seized him by the shoulder and
 gazed with an intensity of loathing and revenge at him, but said nothing-as tho
ugh his feelings were too strong to permit of words.
   General agitation prevailed. Nina Alexandrovna gave a little cry of anxiety; 
Ptitsin took a step forward in alarm; Colia and Ferdishenko stood stock still at
 the door in amazement;-only Varia remained coolly watching the scene from under
 her eyelashes. She did not sit down, but stood by her mother with folded hands.
 However, Gania recollected himself almost immediately. He let go of the prince 
and burst out laughing.
   "Why, are you a doctor, prince, or what?" he asked, as naturally as possible.
 "I declare you quite frightened me! Nastasia Philipovna, let me introduce this 
interesting character to you-though I have only known him myself since the morni
ng."
   Nastasia gazed at the prince in bewilderment. "Prince? He a Prince? Why, I to
ok him for the footman, just now, and sent him in to announce me! Ha, ha, ha, is
n't that good!"
   "Not bad that, not bad at all!" put in Ferdishenko, "se non e vero-"
   "I rather think I pitched into you, too, didn't I? Forgive me-do!
   Who is he, did you say? What prince? Muishkin?" she added, addressing Gania.
   "He is a lodger of ours," explained the latter.
   "An idiot!"-the prince distinctly heard the word half whispered from behind h
im. This was Ferdishenko's voluntary information for Nastasia's benefit.
   "Tell me, why didn't you put me right when I made such a dreadful mistake jus
t now?" continued the latter, examining the prince from head to foot without the
 slightest ceremony. She awaited the answer as though convinced that it would be
 so foolish that she must inevitably fail to restrain her laughter over it.
   "I was astonished, seeing you so suddenly-" murmured the prince.
   "How did you know who I was? Where had you seen me before? And why were you s
o struck dumb at the sight of me? What was there so overwhelming about me?"
   "Oho! ho, ho, ho!" cried Ferdishenko. "NOW then, prince! My word, what things
 I would say if I had such a chance as that! My goodness, prince-go on!"
   "So should I, in your place, I've no doubt!" laughed the prince to Ferdishenk
o; then continued, addressing Nastasia: "Your portrait struck me very forcibly t
his morning; then I was talking about you to the Epanchins; and then, in the tra
in, before I reached Petersburg, Parfen Rogojin told me a good deal about you; a
nd at the very moment that I opened the door to you I happened to be thinking of
 you, when-there you stood before me!"
   "And how did you recognize me?"
   "From the portrait!"
   "What else?"
   "I seemed to imagine you exactly as you are-I seemed to have seen you somewhe
re."
   "Where-where?"
   "I seem to have seen your eyes somewhere; but it cannot be! I have not seen y
ou-I never was here before. I may have dreamed of you, I don't know."
   The prince said all this with manifest effort-in broken sentences, and with m
any drawings of breath. He was evidently much agitated. Nastasia Philipovna look
ed at him inquisitively, but did not laugh.
   "Bravo, prince!" cried Ferdishenko, delighted.
   At this moment a loud voice from behind the group which hedged in the prince 
and Nastasia Philipovna, divided the crowd, as it were, and before them stood th
e head of the family, General Ivolgin. He was dressed in evening clothes; his mo
ustache was dyed.
   This apparition was too much for Gania. Vain and ambitious almost to morbidne
ss, he had had much to put up with in the last two months, and was seeking fever
ishly for some means of enabling himself to lead a more presentable kind of exis
tence. At home, he now adopted an attitude of absolute cynicism, but he could no
t keep this up before Nastasia Philipovna, although he had sworn to make her pay
 after marriage for all he suffered now. He was experiencing a last humiliation,
 the bitterest of all, at this moment-the humiliation of blushing for his own ki
ndred in his own house. A question flashed through his mind as to whether the ga
me was really worth the candle.
   For that had happened at this moment, which for two months had been his night
mare; which had filled his soul with dread and shame-the meeting between his fat
her and Nastasia Philipovna. He had often tried to imagine such an event, but ha
d found the picture too mortifying and exasperating, and had quietly dropped it.
 Very likely he anticipated far worse things than was at all necessary; it is of
ten so with vain persons. He had long since determined, therefore, to get his fa
ther out of the way, anywhere, before his marriage, in order to avoid such a mee
ting; but when Nastasia entered the room just now, he had been so overwhelmed wi
th astonishment, that he had not thought of his father, and had made no arrangem
ents to keep him out of the way.
   And now it was too late-there he was, and got up, too, in a dress coat and wh
ite tie, and Nastasia in the very humour to heap ridicule on him and his family 
circle; of this last fact, he felt quite persuaded. What else had she come for? 
There were his mother and his sister sitting before her, and she seemed to have 
forgotten their very existence already; and if she behaved like that, he thought
, she must have some object in view.
   Ferdishenko led the general up to Nastasia Philipovna.
   "Ardalion Alexandrovitch Ivolgin," said the smiling general, with a low bow o
f great dignity, "an old soldier, unfortunate, and the father of this family; bu
t happy in the hope of including in that family so exquisite-"
   He did not finish his sentence, for at this moment Ferdishenko pushed a chair
 up from behind, and the general, not very firm on his legs, at this post-prandi
al hour, flopped into it backwards.
   It was always a difficult thing to put this warrior to confusion, and his sud
den descent left him as composed as before. He had sat down just opposite to Nas
tasia, whose fingers he now took, and raised to his lips with great elegance, an
d much courtesy. The general had once belonged to a very select circle of societ
y, but he had been turned out of it two or three years since on account of certa
in weaknesses, in which he now indulged with all the less restraint; but his goo
d manners remained with him to this day, in spite of all.
   Nastasia Philipovna seemed delighted at the appearance of this latest arrival
, of whom she had of course heard a good deal by report.
   "I have heard that my son-" began Ardalion Alexandrovitch.
   "Your son, indeed! A nice papa you are! YOU might have come to see me anyhow,
 without compromising anyone. Do you hide yourself, or does your son hide you?"
   "The children of the nineteenth century, and their parents-" began the genera
l, again.
   "Nastasia Philipovna, will you excuse the general for a moment?
   Someone is inquiring for him," said Nina Alexandrovna in a loud voice, interr
upting the conversation.
   "Excuse him? Oh no, I have wished to see him too long for that.
   Why, what business can he have? He has retired, hasn't he? You won't leave me
, general, will you?"
   "I give you my word that he shall come and see you-but he-he needs rest just 
now."
   "General, they say you require rest," said Nastasia Philipovna, with the mela
ncholy face of a child whose toy is taken away.
   Ardalion Alexandrovitch immediately did his best to make his foolish position
 a great deal worse.
   "My dear, my dear!" he said, solemnly and reproachfully, looking at his wife,
 with one hand on his heart.
   "Won't you leave the room, mamma?" asked Varia, aloud.
   "No, Varia, I shall sit it out to the end."
   Nastasia must have overheard both question and reply, but her vivacity was no
t in the least damped. On the contrary, it seemed to increase. She immediately o
verwhelmed the general once more with questions, and within five minutes that ge
ntleman was as happy as a king, and holding forth at the top of his voice, amid 
the laughter of almost all who heard him.
   Colia jogged the prince's arm.
   "Can't YOU get him out of the room, somehow? DO, please," and tears of annoya
nce stood in the boy's eyes. "Curse that Gania!" he muttered, between his teeth.
   "Oh yes, I knew General Epanchin well," General Ivolgin was saying at this mo
ment; "he and Prince Nicolai Ivanovitch Muishkin-whose son I have this day embra
ced after an absence of twenty years-and I, were three inseparables. Alas one is
 in the grave, torn to pieces by calumnies and bullets; another is now before yo
u, still battling with calumnies and bullets-"
   "Bullets?" cried Nastasia.
   "Yes, here in my chest. I received them at the siege of Kars, and I feel them
 in bad weather now. And as to the third of our trio, Epanchin, of course after 
that little affair with the poodle in the railway carriage, it was all UP betwee
n us."
   "Poodle? What was that? And in a railway carriage? Dear me," said Nastasia, t
houghtfully, as though trying to recall something to mind.
   "Oh, just a silly, little occurrence, really not worth telling, about Princes
s Bielokonski's governess, Miss Smith, and-oh, it is really not worth telling!"
   "No, no, we must have it!" cried Nastasia merrily.
   "Yes, of course," said Ferdishenko. "C'est du nouveau."
   "Ardalion," said Nina Alexandrovitch, entreatingly.
   "Papa, you are wanted!" cried Colia.
   "Well, it is a silly little story, in a few words," began the delighted gener
al. "A couple of years ago, soon after the new railway was opened, I had to go s
omewhere or other on business.
   Well, I took a first-class ticket, sat down, and began to smoke, or rather CO
NTINUED to smoke, for I had lighted up before. I was alone in the carriage. Smok
ing is not allowed, but is not prohibited either; it is half allowed-so to speak
, winked at. I had the window open."
   "Suddenly, just before the whistle, in came two ladies with a little poodle, 
and sat down opposite to me; not bad-looking women; one was in light blue, the o
ther in black silk. The poodle, a beauty with a silver collar, lay on light blue
's knee.
   They looked haughtily about, and talked English together. I took no notice, j
ust went on smoking. I observed that the ladies were getting angry-over my cigar
, doubtless. One looked at me through her tortoise-shell eyeglass.
   "I took no notice, because they never said a word. If they didn't like the ci
gar, why couldn't they say so? Not a word, not a hint!
   Suddenly, and without the very slightest suspicion of warning, 'light blue' s
eizes my cigar from between my fingers, and, wheugh! out of the window with it! 
Well, on flew the train, and I sat bewildered, and the young woman, tall and fai
r, and rather red in the face, too red, glared at me with flashing eyes.
   "I didn't say a word, but with extreme courtesy, I may say with most refined 
courtesy, I reached my finger and thumb over towards the poodle, took it up deli
cately by the nape of the neck, and chucked it out of the window, after the ciga
r. The train went flying on, and the poodle's yells were lost in the distance."
   "Oh, you naughty man!" cried Nastasia, laughing and clapping her hands like a
 child.
   "Bravo!" said Ferdishenko. Ptitsin laughed too, though he had been very sorry
 to see the general appear. Even Colia laughed and said, "Bravo!"
   "And I was right, truly right," cried the general, with warmth and solemnity,
 "for if cigars are forbidden in railway carriages, poodles are much more so."
   "Well, and what did the lady do?" asked Nastasia, impatiently.
   " She-ah, that's where all the mischief of it lies!" replied Ivolgin, frownin
g. "Without a word, as it were, of warning, she slapped me on the cheek! An extr
aordinary woman!"
   "And you?"
   The general dropped his eyes, and elevated his brows; shrugged his shoulders,
 tightened his lips, spread his hands, and remained silent. At last he blurted o
ut:
   "I lost my head!"
   "Did you hit her?"
   "No, oh no!-there was a great flare-up, but I didn't hit her! I had to strugg
le a little, purely to defend myself; but the very devil was in the business. It
 turned out that 'light blue' was an Englishwoman, governess or something, at Pr
incess Bielokonski's, and the other woman was one of the old-maid princesses Bie
lokonski. Well, everybody knows what great friends the princess and Mrs. Epanchi
n are, so there was a pretty kettle of fish. All the Bielokonskis went into mour
ning for the poodle. Six princesses in tears, and the Englishwoman shrieking!
   "Of course I wrote an apology, and called, but they would not receive either 
me or my apology, and the Epanchins cut me, too!"
   "But wait," said Nastasia. "How is it that, five or six days since, I read ex
actly the same story in the paper, as happening between a Frenchman and an Engli
sh girl? The cigar was snatched away exactly as you describe, and the poodle was
 chucked out of the window after it. The slapping came off, too, as in your case
; and the girl's dress was light blue!"
   The general blushed dreadfully; Colia blushed too; and Ptitsin turned hastily
 away. Ferdishenko was the only one who laughed as gaily as before. As to Gania,
 I need not say that he was miserable; he stood dumb and wretched and took no no
tice of anybody.
   "I assure you," said the general, "that exactly the same thing happened to my
self!"
   "I remembered there was some quarrel between father and Miss Smith, the Bielo
konski's governess," said Colia.
   "How very curious, point for point the same anecdote, and happening at differ
ent ends of Europe! Even the light blue dress the same," continued the pitiless 
Nastasia. "I must really send you the paper."
   "You must observe," insisted the general, "that my experience was two years e
arlier."
   "Ah! that's it, no doubt!"
   Nastasia Philipovna laughed hysterically.
   "Father, will you hear a word from me outside!" said Gania, his voice shaking
 with agitation, as he seized his father by the shoulder. His eyes shone with a 
blaze of hatred.
   At this moment there was a terrific bang at the front door, almost enough to 
break it down. Some most unusual visitor must have arrived. Colia ran to open.
      X.
   THE entrance-hall suddenly became full of noise and people. To judge from the
 sounds which penetrated to the drawing-room, a number of people had already com
e in, and the stampede continued.
   Several voices were talking and shouting at once; others were talking and sho
uting on the stairs outside; it was evidently a most extraordinary visit that wa
s about to take place.
   Everyone exchanged startled glances. Gania rushed out towards the dining-room
, but a number of men had already made their way in, and met him.
   "Ah! here he is, the Judas!" cried a voice which the prince recognized at onc
e. "How d'ye do, Gania, you old blackguard?"
   "Yes, that's the man!" said another voice.
   There was no room for doubt in the prince's mind: one of the voices was Rogoj
in's, and the other Lebedeff's.
   Gania stood at the door like a block and looked on in silence, putting no obs
tacle in the way of their entrance, and ten or a dozen men marched in behind Par
fen Rogojin. They were a decidedly mixed-looking collection, and some of them ca
me in in their furs and caps. None of them were quite drunk, but all appeared to
 De considerably excited.
   They seemed to need each other's support, morally, before they dared come in;
 not one of them would have entered alone but with the rest each one was brave e
nough. Even Rogojin entered rather cautiously at the head of his troop; but he w
as evidently preoccupied. He appeared to be gloomy and morose, and had clearly c
ome with some end in view. All the rest were merely chorus, brought in to suppor
t the chief character. Besides Lebedeff there was the dandy Zalesheff, who came 
in without his coat and hat, two or three others followed his example; the rest 
were more uncouth. They included a couple of young merchants, a man in a great-c
oat, a medical student, a little Pole, a small fat man who laughed continuously,
 and an enormously tall stout one who apparently put great faith in the strength
 of his fists. A couple of "ladies" of some sort put their heads in at the front
 door, but did not dare come any farther. Colia promptly banged the door in thei
r faces and locked it.
   "Hallo, Gania, you blackguard! You didn't expect Rogojin, eh?" said the latte
r, entering the drawing-room, and stopping before Gania.
   But at this moment he saw, seated before him, Nastasia Philipovna. He had not
 dreamed of meeting her here, evidently, for her appearance produced a marvellou
s effect upon him. He grew pale, and his lips became actually blue.
   "I suppose it is true, then!" he muttered to himself, and his face took on an
 expression of despair. "So that's the end of it!
   Now you, sir, will you answer me or not?" he went on suddenly, gazing at Gani
a with ineffable malice. "Now then, you-"
   He panted, and could hardly speak for agitation. He advanced into the room me
chanically; but perceiving Nina Alexandrovna and Varia he became more or less em
barrassed, in spite of his excitement.
   His followers entered after him, and all paused a moment at sight of the ladi
es. Of course their modesty was not fated to be longlived, but for a moment they
 were abashed. Once let them begin to shout, however, and nothing on earth shoul
d disconcert them.
   "What, you here too, prince?" said Rogojin, absently, but a little surprised 
all the same " Still in your gaiters, eh?" He sighed, and forgot the prince next
 moment, and his wild eyes wandered over to Nastasia again, as though attracted 
in that direction by some magnetic force.
   Nastasia looked at the new arrivals with great curiosity. Gania recollected h
imself at last.
   "Excuse me, sirs," he said, loudly, "but what does all this mean?" He glared 
at the advancing crowd generally, but addressed his remarks especially to their 
captain, Rogojin. "You are not in a stable, gentlemen, though you may think it-m
y mother and sister are present."
   "Yes, I see your mother and sister," muttered Rogojin, through his teeth; and
 Lebedeff seemed to feel himself called upon to second the statement.
   "At all events, I must request you to step into the salon," said Gania, his r
age rising quite out of proportion to his words, "and then I shall inquire-"
   "What, he doesn't know me!" said Rogojin, showing his teeth disagreeably. "He
 doesn't recognize Rogojin!" He did not move an inch, however.
   "I have met you somewhere, I believe, but-"
   "Met me somewhere, pfu! Why, it's only three months since I lost two hundred 
roubles of my father's money to you, at cards. The old fellow died before he fou
nd out. Ptitsin knows all about it.
   Why, I've only to pull out a three-rouble note and show it to you, and you'd 
crawl on your hands and knees to the other end of the town for it; that's the so
rt of man you are. Why, I've come now, at this moment, to buy you up! Oh, you ne
edn't think that because I wear these boots I have no money. I have lots of mone
y, my beauty,-enough to buy up you and all yours together. So I shall, if I like
 to! I'll buy you up! I will!" he yelled, apparently growing more and more intox
icated and excited." Oh, Nastasia Philipovna! don't turn me out! Say one word, d
o! Are you going to marry this man, or not?"
   Rogojin asked his question like a lost soul appealing to some divinity, with 
the reckless daring of one appointed to die, who has nothing to lose.
   He awaited the reply in deadly anxiety.
   Nastasia Philipovna gazed at him with a haughty, ironical. expression of face
; but when she glanced at Nina Alexandrovna and Varia, and from them to Gania, s
he changed her tone, all of a sudden.
   "Certainly not; what are you thinking of? What could have induced you to ask 
such a question?" she replied, quietly and seriously, and even, apparently, with
 some astonishment.
   "No? No?" shouted Rogojin, almost out of his mind with joy. "You are not goin
g to, after all? And they told me-oh, Nastasia Philipovna-they said you had prom
ised to marry him, HIM! As if you COULD do it!-him-pooh! I don't mind saying it 
to everyone-I'd buy him off for a hundred roubles, any day pfu! Give him a thous
and, or three if he likes, poor devil' and he'd cut and run the day before his w
edding, and leave his bride to me! Wouldn't you, Gania, you blackguard? You'd ta
ke three thousand, wouldn't you? Here's the money! Look, I've come on purpose to
 pay you off and get your receipt, formally. I said I'd buy you up, and so I wil
l."
   "Get out of this, you drunken beast!" cried Gania, who was red and white by t
urns.
   Rogojin's troop, who were only waiting for an excuse, set up a howl at this. 
Lebedeff stepped forward and whispered something in Parfen's ear.
   "You're right, clerk," said the latter, "you're right, tipsy spirit-you're ri
ght!-Nastasia Philipovna," he added, looking at her like some lunatic, harmless 
generally, but suddenly wound up to a pitch of audacity, "here are eighteen thou
sand roubles, and-and you shall have more-." Here he threw a packet of banknotes
 tied up in white paper, on the table before her, not daring to say all he wishe
d to say.
   "No-no-no!" muttered Lebedeff, clutching at his arm. He was clearly aghast at
 the largeness of the sum, and thought a far smaller amount should have been tri
ed first.
   "No, you fool-you don't know whom you are dealing with-and it appears I am a 
fool, too!" said Parfen, trembling beneath the flashing glance of Nastasia. "Oh,
 curse it all! What a fool I was to listen to you!" he added, with profound mela
ncholy.
   Nastasia Philipovna, observing his woe-begone expression, suddenly burst out 
laughing.
   "Eighteen thousand roubles, for me? Why, you declare yourself a fool at once,
" she said, with impudent familiarity, as she rose from the sofa and prepared to
 go. Gania watched the whole scene with a sinking of the heart.
   "Forty thousand, then-forty thousand roubles instead of eighteen!
   Ptitsin and another have promised to find me forty thousand roubles by seven 
o'clock tonight. Forty thousand roubles-paid down on the nail!"
   The scene was growing more and more disgraceful; but Nastasia Philipovna cont
inued to laugh and did not go away. Nina Alexandrovna and Varia had both risen f
rom their places and were waiting, in silent horror, to see what would happen. V
aria's eyes were all ablaze with anger; but the scene had a different effect on 
Nina Alexandrovna. She paled and trembled, and looked more and more like faintin
g every moment.
   "Very well then, a HUNDRED thousand! a hundred thousand! paid this very day. 
Ptitsin! find it for me. A good share shall stick to your fingers-come!"
   "You are mad!" said Ptitsin, coming up quickly and seizing him by the hand. "
You're drunk-the police will be sent for if you don't look out. Think where you 
are."
   "Yes, he's boasting like a drunkard," added Nastasia, as though with the sole
 intention of goading him.
   "I do NOT boast! You shall have a hundred thousand, this very day. Ptitsin, g
et the money, you gay usurer! Take what you like for it, but get it by the eveni
ng! I'll show that I'm in earnest!" cried Rogojin, working himself up into a fre
nzy of excitement.
   "Come, come; what's all this?" cried General Ivolgin, suddenly and angrily, c
oming close up to Rogojin. The unexpectedness of this sally on the part of the h
itherto silent old man caused some laughter among the intruders.
   "Halloa! what's this now?" laughed Rogojin. "You come along with me, old fell
ow! You shall have as much to drink as you like."
   "Oh, it's too horrible!" cried poor Colia, sobbing with shame and annoyance.
   "Surely there must be someone among all of you here who will turn this shamel
ess creature out of the room?" cried Varia, suddenly.
   She was shaking and trembling with rage.
   "That's me, I suppose. I'm the shameless creature!" cried Nastasia Philipovna
, with amused indifference. "Dear me, and I came-like a fool, as I am-to invite 
them over to my house for the evening! Look how your sister treats me, Gavrila A
rdalionovitch."
   For some moments Gania stood as if stunned or struck by lightning, after his 
sister's speech. But seeing that Nastasia Philipovna was really about to leave t
he room this time, he sprang at Varia and seized her by the arm like a madman.
   "What have you done?" he hissed, glaring at her as though he would like to an
nihilate her on the spot. He was quite beside himself, and could hardly articula
te his words for rage.
   "What have I done? Where are you dragging me to?"
   "Do you wish me to beg pardon of this creature because she has come here to i
nsult our mother and disgrace the whole household, you low, base wretch?" cried 
Varia, looking back at her brother with proud defiance.
   A few moments passed as they stood there face to face, Gania still holding he
r wrist tightly. Varia struggled once-twice-to get free; then could restrain her
self no longer, and spat in his face.
   "There's a girl for you!" cried Nastasia Philipovna. "Mr.
   Ptitsin, I congratulate you on your choice."
   Gania lost his head. Forgetful of everything he aimed a blow at Varia, which 
would inevitably have laid her low, but suddenly another hand caught his. Betwee
n him and Varia stood the prince.
   "Enough-enough!" said the latter, with insistence, but all of a tremble with 
excitement.
   "Are you going to cross my path for ever, damn you!" cried Gania; and, loosen
ing his hold on Varia, he slapped the prince's face with all his force.
   Exclamations of horror arose on all sides. The prince grew pale as death; he 
gazed into Gania's eyes with a strange, wild, reproachful look; his lips tremble
d and vainly endeavoured to form some words; then his mouth twisted into an inco
ngruous smile.
   "Very well-never mind about me; but I shall not allow you to strike her!" he 
said, at last, quietly. Then, suddenly, he could bear it no longer, and covering
 his face with his hands, turned to the wall, and murmured in broken accents:
   "Oh! how ashamed you will be of this afterwards!"
   Gania certainly did look dreadfully abashed. Colia rushed up to comfort the p
rince, and after him crowded Varia, Rogojin and all, even the general.
   "It's nothing, it's nothing!" said the prince, and again he wore the smile wh
ich was so inconsistent with the circumstances.
   "Yes, he will be ashamed!" cried Rogojin. "You will be properly ashamed of yo
urself for having injured such a-such a sheep" (he could not find a better word)
. "Prince, my dear fellow, leave this and come away with me. I'll show you how R
ogojin shows his affection for his friends."
   Nastasia Philipovna was also much impressed, both with Gania's action and wit
h the prince's reply.
   Her usually thoughtful, pale face, which all this while had been so little in
 harmony with the jests and laughter which she had seemed to put on for the occa
sion, was now evidently agitated by new feelings, though she tried to conceal th
e fact and to look as though she were as ready as ever for jesting and irony.
   "I really think I must have seen him somewhere!" she murmured seriously enoug
h.
   "Oh, aren't you ashamed of yourself-aren't you ashamed? Are you really the so
rt of woman you are trying to represent yourself to be? Is it possible?" The pri
nce was now addressing Nastasia, in a tone of reproach, which evidently came fro
m his very heart.
   Nastasia Philipovna looked surprised, and smiled, but evidently concealed som
ething beneath her smile and with some confusion and a glance at Gania she left 
the room.
   However, she had not reached the outer hall when she turned round, walked qui
ckly up to Nina Alexandrovna, seized her hand and lifted it to her lips.
   "He guessed quite right. I am not that sort of woman," she whispered hurriedl
y, flushing red all over. Then she turned again and left the room so quickly tha
t no one could imagine what she had come back for. All they saw was that she sai
d something to Nina Alexandrovna in a hurried whisper, and seemed to kiss her ha
nd. Varia, however, both saw and heard all, and watched Nastasia out of the room
 with an expression of wonder.
   Gania recollected himself in time to rush after her in order to show her out,
 but she had gone. He followed her to the stairs.
   "Don't come with me," she cried, "Au revoir, till the evening-do you hear? Au
 revoir!"
   He returned thoughtful and confused; the riddle lay heavier than ever on his 
soul. He was troubled about the prince, too, and so bewildered that he did not e
ven observe Rogojin's rowdy band crowd past him and step on his toes, at the doo
r as they went out. They were all talking at once. Rogojin went ahead of the oth
ers, talking to Ptitsin, and apparently insisting vehemently upon something very
 important "You've lost the game, Gania" he cried, as he passed the latter.
   Gania gazed after him uneasily, but said nothing.
      XI.
   THE prince now left the room and shut himself up in his own chamber. Colia fo
llowed him almost at once, anxious to do what he could to console him. The poor 
boy seemed to be already so attached to him that he could hardly leave him.
   "You were quite right to go away!" he said. "The row will rage there worse th
an ever now; and it's like this every day with us-and all through that Nastasia 
Philipovna."
   "You have so many sources of trouble here, Colia," said the prince.
   "Yes, indeed, and it is all our own fault. But I have a great friend who is m
uch worse off even than we are. Would you like to know him?"
   "Yes, very much. Is he one of your school-fellows?"
   "Well, not exactly. I will tell you all about him some day
   What do you think of Nastasia Philipovna? She is beautiful, isn't she? I had 
never seen her before, though I had a great wish to do so. She fascinated me. I 
could forgive Gania if he were to marry her for love, but for money! Oh dear! th
at is horrible!"
   "Yes, your brother does not attract me much."
   "I am not surprised at that. After what you But I do hate that way of looking 
at things! Because some fool, or a rogue pretending to be a fool, strikes a man,
 that man is to be dishonoured for his whole life, unless he wipes out the disgr
ace with blood, or makes his assailant beg forgiveness on his knees!
   I think that so very absurd and tyrannical. Lermontoff's Bal Masque is based 
on that idea-a stupid and unnatural one, in my opinion; but he was hardly more t
han a child when he wrote it."
   "I like your sister very much."
   "Did you see how she spat in Gania's face! Varia is afraid of no one. But you
 did not follow her example, and yet I am sure it was not through cowardice. Her
e she comes! Speak of a wolf and you see his tail! I felt sure that she would co
me. She is very generous, though of course she has her faults."
   Varia pounced upon her brother.
   "This is not the place for you," said she. "Go to father. Is he plaguing you,
 prince?"
   "Not in the least; on the contrary, he interests me."
   "Scolding as usual, Varia! It is the worst thing about her. After all, I beli
eve father may have started off with Rogojin. No doubt he is sorry now. Perhaps 
I had better go and see what he is doing," added Colia, running off.
   "Thank God, I have got mother away, and put her to bed without another scene!
 Gania is worried-and ashamed-not without reason!
   What a spectacle! I have come to thank you once more, prince, and to ask you 
if you knew Nastasia Philipovna before "No, I have never known her."
   "Then what did you mean, when you said straight out to her that she was not r
eally 'like that'? You guessed right, I fancy. It is quite possible she was not 
herself at the moment, though I cannot fathom her meaning. Evidently she meant t
o hurt and insult us. I have heard curious tales about her before now, but if sh
e came to invite us to her house, why did she behave so to my mother?
   Ptitsin knows her very well; he says he could not understand her today. With 
Rogojin, too! No one with a spark of self-respect could have talked like that in
 the house of her Mother is extremely vexed on your account, too
   "That is nothing!" said the prince, waving his hand.
   "But how meek she was when you spoke to her!"
   "Meek! What do you mean?"
   "You told her it was a shame for her to behave so, and her manner changed at 
once; she was like another person. You have some influence over her, prince," ad
ded Varia, smiling a little.
   The door opened at this point, and in came Gania most unexpectedly.
   He was not in the least disconcerted to see Varia there, but he stood a momen
t at the door, and then approached the prince quietly.
   "Prince," he said, with feeling, "I was a blackguard. Forgive me!" His face g
ave evidence of suffering. The prince was considerably amazed, and did not reply
 at once. "Oh, come, forgive me, forgive me!" Gania insisted, rather impatiently
. "If you like, I'll kiss your hand. There!"
   The prince was touched; he took Gania's hands, and embraced him heartily, whi
le each kissed the other.
   "I never, never thought you were like that," said Muishkin, drawing a deep br
eath. "I thought you-you weren't capable of-"
   "Of what? Apologizing, eh? And where on earth did I get the idea that you wer
e an idiot? You always observe what other people pass by unnoticed; one could ta
lk sense to you, but-"
   "Here is another to whom you should apologize," said the prince, pointing to 
Varia.
   "No, no! they are all enemies! I've tried them often enough, believe me," and
 Gania turned his back on Varia with these words.
   "But if I beg you to make it up?" said Varia.
   "And you'll go to Nastasia Philipovna's this evening-"
   "If you insist: but, judge for yourself, can I go, ought I to go?"
   "But she is not that sort of woman, I tell you!" said Gania, angrily. "She wa
s only acting."
   "I know that-I know that; but what a part to play! And think what she must ta
ke YOU for, Gania! I know she kissed mother's hand, and all that, but she laughe
d at you, all the same. All this is not good enough for seventy-five thousand ro
ubles, my dear boy. You are capable of honourable feelings still, and that's why
 I am talking to you so. Oh! DO take care what you are doing! Don't you know you
rself that it will end badly, Gania?"
   So saying, and in a state of violent agitation, Varia left the room.
   "There, they are all like that," said Gania, laughing, "just as if I do not k
now all about it much better than they do."
   He sat down with these words, evidently intending to prolong his visit.
   "If you know it so well," said the prince a little timidly, "why do you choos
e all this worry for the sake of the seventy-five thousand, which, you confess, 
does not cover it?"
   "I didn't mean that," said Gania; "but while we are upon the subject, let me 
hear your opinion. Is all this worry worth seventy-five thousand or not?
   "Certainly not."
   "Of course! And it would be a disgrace to marry so, eh?"
   "A great disgrace."
   "Oh, well, then you may know that I shall certainly do it, now. I shall certa
inly marry her. I was not quite sure of myself before, but now I am. Don't say a
 word: I know what you want to tell me-"
   "No. I was only going to say that what surprises me most of all is your extra
ordinary confidence."
   "How so? What in?"
   "That Nastasia Philipovna will accept you, and that the question is as good a
s settled; and secondly, that even if she did, you would be able to pocket the m
oney. Of course, I know very little about it, but that's my view. When a man mar
ries for money it often happens that the wife keeps the money in her own hands."
   "Of course, you don't know all; but, I assure you, you needn't be afraid, it 
won't be like that in our case. There are circumstances," said Gania, rather exc
itedly. "And as to her answer to me, there's no doubt about that. Why should you
 suppose she will refuse me?"
   "Oh, I only judge by what I see. Varvara Ardalionovna said just now-"
   "Oh she-they don't know anything about it! Nastasia was only chaffing Rogojin
. I was alarmed at first, but I have thought better of it now; she was simply la
ughing at him. She looks on me as a fool because I show that I meant her money, 
and doesn't realize that there are other men who would deceive her in far worse 
fashion. I'm not going to pretend anything, and you'll see she'll marry me, all 
right. If she likes to live quietly, so she shall; but if she gives me any of he
r nonsense, I shall leave her at once, but I shall keep the money. I'm not going
 to look a fool; that's the first thing, not to look a fool."
   "But Nastasia Philipovna seems to me to be such a SENSIBLE woman, and, as suc
h, why should she run blindly into this business?
   That's what puzzles me so," said the prince.
   "You don't know all, you see; I tell you there are things-and besides, I'm su
re that she is persuaded that I love her to distraction, and I give you my word 
I have a strong suspicion that she loves me, too-in her own way, of course. She 
thinks she will be able to make a sort of slave of me all my life; but I shall p
repare a little surprise for her. I don't know whether I ought to be confidentia
l with you, prince; but, I assure you, you are the only decent fellow I have com
e across. I have not spoken so sincerely as I am doing at this moment for years.
 There are uncommonly few honest people about, prince; there isn't one honester 
than Ptitsin, he's the best of the lot. Are you laughing? You don't know, perhap
s, that blackguards like honest people, and being one myself I like you. WHY am 
I a blackguard?
   Tell me honestly, now. They all call me a blackguard because of her, and I ha
ve got into the way of thinking myself one. That's what is so bad about the busi
ness."
   "I for one shall never think you a blackguard again," said the prince. "I con
fess I had a poor opinion of you at first, but I have been so joyfully surprised
 about you just now; it's a good lesson for me. I shall never judge again withou
t a thorough trial. I see now that you are riot only not a blackguard, but are n
ot even quite spoiled. I see that you are quite an ordinary man, not original in
 the least degree, but rather weak."
   Gania laughed sarcastically, but said nothing. The prince, seeing that he did
 not quite like the last remark, blushed, and was silent too.
   "Has my father asked you for money?" asked Gania, suddenly.
   "No."
   "Don't give it to him if he does. Fancy, he was a decent, respectable man onc
e! He was received in the best society; he was not always the liar he is now. Of
 course, wine is at the bottom of it all; but he is a good deal worse than an in
nocent liar now.
   Do you know that he keeps a mistress? I can't understand how mother is so lon
g-sufferring. Did he tell you the story of the siege of Kars? Or perhaps the one
 about his grey horse that talked? He loves, to enlarge on these absurd historie
s." And Gania burst into a fit of laughter. Suddenly he turned to the prince and
 asked: "Why are you looking at me like that?"
   "I am surprised to see you laugh in that way, like a child. You came to make 
friends with me again just now, and you said, 'I will kiss your hand, if you lik
e,' just as a child would have said it. And then, all at once you are talking of
 this mad project-of these seventy-five thousand roubles! It all seems so absurd
 and impossible."
   "Well, what conclusion have you reached?"
   "That you are rushing madly into the undertaking, and that you would do well 
to think it over again. It is more than possible that Varvara Ardalionovna is ri
ght."
   "Ah! now you begin to moralize! I know that I am only a child, very well," re
plied Gania impatiently. "That is proved by my having this conversation with you
. It is not for money only, prince, that I am rushing into this affair," he cont
inued, hardly master of his words, so closely had his vanity been touched. "If I
 reckoned on that I should certainly be deceived, for I am still too weak in min
d and character. I am obeying a passion, an impulse perhaps, because I have but 
one aim, one that overmasters all else. You imagine that once I am in possession
 of these seventy-five thousand roubles, I shall rush to buy a carriage
   No, I shall go on wearing the old overcoat I have worn for three years, and I
 shall give up my club. I shall follow the example of men who have made their fo
rtunes. When Ptitsin was seventeen he slept in the street, he sold pen-knives, a
nd began with a copeck; now he has sixty thousand roubles, but to get them, what
 has he not done? Well, I shall be spared such a hard beginning, and shall start
 with a little capital. In fifteen years people will say, 'Look, that's Ivolgin,
 the king of the Jews!' You say that I have no originality. Now mark this, princ
e-there is nothing so offensive to a man of our time and race than to be told th
at he is wanting in originality, that he is weak in character, has no particular
 talent, and is, in short, an ordinary person. You have not even done me the hon
our of looking upon me as a rogue. Do you know, I could have knocked you down fo
r that just now! You wounded me more cruelly than Epanchin, who thinks me capabl
e of selling him my wife! Observe, it was a perfectly gratuitous idea on his par
t, seeing there has never been any discussion of it between us! This has exasper
ated me, and I am determined to make a fortune! I will do it! Once I am rich, I 
shall be a genius, an extremely original man. One of the vilest and most hateful
 things connected with money is that it can buy even talent; and will do so as l
ong as the world lasts.
   You will say that this is childish-or romantic. Well, that will be all the be
tter for me, but the thing shall be done. I will carry it through. He laughs mos
t, who laughs last. Why does Epanchin insult me? Simply because, socially, I am 
a nobody.
   However, enough for the present. Colia has put his nose in to tell us dinner 
is ready, twice. I'm dining out. I shall come and talk to you now and then; you 
shall be comfortable enough with us. They are sure to make you one of the family
. I think you and I will either be great friends or enemies. Look here now, supp
osing I had kissed your hand just now, as I offered to do in all sincerity, shou
ld I have hated you for it afterwards?"
   "Certainly, but not always. You would not have been able to keep it up, and w
ould have ended by forgiving me," said the prince, after a pause for reflection,
 and with a pleasant smile.
   "Oho, how careful one has to be with you, prince! Haven't you put a drop of p
oison in that remark now, eh? By the way-ha, ha, ha!-I forgot to ask, was I righ
t in believing that you were a good deal struck yourself with Nastasia Philipovn
a "Ye-yes."
   "Are you in love with her?"
   "N-no."
   "And yet you flush up as red as a rosebud! Come-it's all right.
   I'm not going to laugh at you. Do you know she is a very virtuous woman? Beli
eve it or not, as you like. You think she and Totski-not a bit of it, not a bit 
of it! Not for ever so long! Au revoir!"
   Gania left the room in great good humour. The prince stayed behind, and medit
ated alone for a few minutes. At length, Colia popped his head in once more.
   "I don't want any dinner, thanks, Colia. I had too good a lunch at General Ep
anchin's."
   Colia came into the room and gave the prince a note; it was from the general 
and was carefully sealed up. It was clear from Colia's face how painful it was t
o him to deliver the missive.
   The prince read it, rose, and took his hat.
   "It's only a couple of yards," said Colia, blushing.
   "He's sitting there over his bottle-and how they can give him credit, I canno
t understand. Don't tell mother I brought you the note, prince; I have sworn not
 to do it a thousand times, but I'm always so sorry for him. Don't stand on cere
mony, give him some trifle, and let that end it."
   "Come along, Colia, I want to see your father. I have an idea," said the prin
ce.
      XII.
   Colia took the prince to a public-house in the Litaynaya, not far off. In one
 of the side rooms there sat at a table-looking like one of the regular guests o
f the establishment-Ardalion Alexandrovitch, with a bottle before him, and a new
spaper on his knee. He was waiting for the prince, and no sooner did the latter 
appear than he began a long harangue about something or other; but so far gone w
as he that the prince could hardly understand a word.
   "I have not got a ten-rouble note," said the prince; "but here is a twenty-fi
ve. Change it and give me back the fifteen, or I shall be left without a farthin
g myself."
   "Oh, of course, of course; and you quite understand that I-"
   "Yes; and I have another request to make, general. Have you ever been at Nast
asia Philipovna's?"
   "I? I? Do you mean me? Often, my friend, often! I only pretended I had not in
 order to avoid a painful subject. You saw today, you were a witness, that I did
 all that a kind, an indulgent father could do. Now a father of altogether anoth
er type shall step into the scene. You shall see; the old soldier shall lay bare
 this intrigue, or a shameless woman will force her way into a respectable and n
oble family."
   "Yes, quite so. I wished to ask you whether you could show me the way to Nast
asia Philipovna's tonight. I must go; I have business with her; I was not invite
d but I was introduced. Anyhow I am ready to trespass the laws of propriety if o
nly I can get in somehow or other."
   "My dear young friend, you have hit on my very idea. It was not for this rubb
ish I asked you to come over here" (he pocketed the money, however, at this poin
t), "it was to invite your alliance in the campaign against Nastasia Philipovna 
tonight. How well it sounds, 'General Ivolgin and Prince Muishkin.' That'll fetc
h her, I think, eh? Capital! We'll go at nine; there's time yet."
   "Where does she live?"
   "Oh, a long way off, near the Great Theatre, just in the square there-It won'
t be a large party."
   The general sat on and on. He had ordered a fresh bottle when the prince arri
ved; this took him an hour to drink, and then he had another, and another, durin
g the consumption of which he told pretty nearly the whole story of his life. Th
e prince was in despair. He felt that though he had but applied to this miserabl
e old drunkard because he saw no other way of getting to Nastasia Philipovna's, 
yet he had been very wrong to put the slightest confidence in such a man.
   At last he rose and declared that he would wait no longer. The general rose t
oo, drank the last drops that he could squeeze out of the bottle, and staggered 
into the street.
   Muishkin began to despair. He could not imagine how he had been so foolish as
 to trust this man. He only wanted one thing, and that was to get to Nastasia Ph
ilipovna's, even at the cost of a certain amount of impropriety. But now the sca
ndal threatened to be more than he had bargained for. By this time Ardalion Alex
androvitch was quite intoxicated, and he kept his companion listening while he d
iscoursed eloquently and pathetically on subjects of all kinds, interspersed wit
h torrents of recrimination against the members of his family. He insisted that 
all his troubles were caused by their bad conduct, and time alone would put an e
nd to them.
   At last they reached the Litaynaya. The thaw increased steadily, a warm, unhe
althy wind blew through the streets, vehicles splashed through the mud, and the 
iron shoes of horses and mules rang on the paving stones. Crowds of melancholy p
eople plodded wearily along the footpaths, with here and there a drunken man amo
ng them.
   "Do you see those brightly-lighted windows?" said the general.
   "Many of my old comrades-in-arms live about here, and I, who served longer, a
nd suffered more than any of them, am walking on foot to the house of a woman of
 rather questionable reputation!
   A man, look you, who has thirteen bullets on his breast! You don't believe it?
 Well, I can assure you it was entirely on my account that Pirogoff telegraphed 
to Paris, and left Sebastopol at the greatest risk during the siege. Nelaton, th
e Tuileries surgeon, demanded a safe conduct, in the name of science, into the b
esieged city in order to attend my wounds. The government knows all about it. 'T
hat's the Ivolgin with thirteen bullets in him!' That's how they speak of me Do y
ou see that house, prince? One of my old friends lives on the first floor, with 
his large family. In this and five other houses, three overlooking Nevsky, two i
n the Morskaya, are all that remain of my personal friends. Nina Alexandrovna ga
ve them up long ago, but I keep in touch with them still I may say I find refresh
ment in this little coterie, in thus meeting my old acquaintances and subordinat
es, who worship me still, in spite of all. General Sokolovitch (by the way, I ha
ve not called on him lately, or seen Anna Fedorovna) You know, my dear prince, wh
en a person does not receive company himself, he gives up going to other people'
s houses involuntarily. And yet well you look as if you didn't believe me Well now,
 why should I not present the son of my old friend and companion to this delight
ful family-General Ivolgin and Prince Muishkin? You will see a lovely girl-what 
am I saying-a lovely girl? No, indeed, two, three! Ornaments of this city and of
 society: beauty, education, culture-the woman question-poetry-everything! Added
 to which is the fact that each one will have a dot of at least eighty thousand 
roubles. No bad thing, eh? In a word I absolutely must introduce you to them: it 
is a duty, an obligation. General Ivolgin and Prince Muishkin. Tableau!"
   "At once? Now? You must have forgotten " began the prince.
   "No, I have forgotten nothing. Come! This is the house-up this magnificent st
aircase. I am surprised not to see the porter, but  it is a holiday and the man ha
s gone off Drunken fool! Why have they not got rid of him? Sokolovitch owes all t
he happiness he has had in the service and in his private life to me, and me alo
ne, but here we are."
   The prince followed quietly, making no further objection for fear of irritati
ng the old man. At the same time he fervently hoped that General Sokolovitch and
 his family would fade away like a mirage in the desert, so that the visitors co
uld escape, by merely returning downstairs. But to his horror he saw that Genera
l Ivolgin was quite familiar with the house, and really seemed to have friends t
here. At every step he named some topographical or biographical detail that left
 nothing to be desired on the score of accuracy. When they arrived at last, on t
he first floor, and the general turned to ring the bell to the right, the prince
 decided to run away, but a curious incident stopped him momentarily.
   "You have made a mistake, general," said he. " The name on the door is Koulak
off, and you were going to see General Sokolovitch."
   "Koulakoff Koulakoff means nothing. This is Sokolovitch's flat, and I am ringi
ng at his door What do I care for Koulakoff? Here comes someone to open."
   In fact, the door opened directly, and the footman in formed the visitors tha
t the family were all away.
   "What a pity! What a pity! It's just my luck!" repeated Ardalion Alexandrovit
ch over and over again, in regretful tones. " When your master and mistress retu
rn, my man, tell them that General Ivolgin and Prince Muishkin desired to presen
t themselves, and that they were extremely sorry, excessively grieved"
   Just then another person belonging to the household was seen at the back of t
he hall. It was a woman of some forty years, dressed in sombre colours, probably
 a housekeeper or a governess. Hearing the names she came forward with a look of
 suspicion on her face.
   "Marie Alexandrovna is not at home," said she, staring hard at the general. "
She has gone to her mother's, with Alexandra Michailovna."
   "Alexandra Michailovna out, too! How disappointing! Would you believe it, I a
m always so unfortunate! May I most respectfully ask you to present my complimen
ts to Alexandra Michailovna, and remind her tell her, that with my whole heart I 
wish for her what she wished for herself on Thursday evening, while she was list
ening to Chopin's Ballade. She will remember. I wish it with all sincerity. Gene
ral Ivolgin and Prince Muishkin!"
   The woman's face changed; she lost her suspicious expression.
   "I will not fail to deliver your message," she replied, and bowed them out.
   As they went downstairs the general regretted repeatedly that he had failed t
o introduce the prince to his friends.
   "You know I am a bit of a poet," said he. "Have you noticed it?
   The poetic soul, you know." Then he added suddenly-"But after all after all I 
believe we made a mistake this time! I remember that the Sokolovitch's live in a
nother house, and what is more, they are just now in Moscow. Yes, I certainly wa
s at fault. However, it is of no consequence."
   "Just tell me," said the prince in reply, "may I count still on your assistan
ce? Or shall I go on alone to see Nastasia Philipovna?"
   "Count on my assistance? Go alone? How can you ask me that question, when it 
is a matter on which the fate of my family so largely depends? You don't know Iv
olgin, my friend. To trust Ivolgin is to trust a rock; that's how the first squa
dron I commanded spoke of me. 'Depend upon Ivolgin,' said they all, 'he is as st
eady as a rock.' But, excuse me, I must just call at a house on our way, a house
 where I have found consolation and help in all my trials for years."
   "You are going home?"
   "No I wish to visit Madame Terentieff, the widow of Captain Terentieff, my old 
subordinate and friend. She helps me to keep up my courage, and to bear the tria
ls of my domestic life, and as I have an extra burden on my mind today"
   "It seems to me," interrupted the prince, "that I was foolish to trouble you 
just now. However, at present you Good-bye!"
   "Indeed, you must not go away like that, young man, you must not!" cried the 
general. "My friend here is a widow, the mother of a family; her words come stra
ight from her heart, and find an echo in mine. A visit to her is merely an affai
r of a few minutes; I am quite at home in her house. I will have a wash, and dre
ss, and then we can drive to the Grand Theatre. Make up your mind to spend the e
vening with me We are just there-that's the house Why, Colia! you here! Well, is M
arfa Borisovna at home or have you only just come?"
   "Oh no! I have been here a long while," replied Colia, who was at the front d
oor when the general met him. "I am keeping Hippolyte company. He is worse, and 
has been in bed all day. I came down to buy some cards. Marfa Borisovna expects 
you. But what a state you are in, father!" added the boy, noticing his father's 
unsteady gait. "Well, let us go in."
   On meeting Colia the prince determined to accompany the general, though he ma
de up his mind to stay as short a time as possible.
   He wanted Colia, but firmly resolved to leave the general behind.
   He could not forgive himself for being so simple as to imagine that Ivolgin w
ould be of any use. The three climbed up the long staircase until they reached t
he fourth floor where Madame Terentieff lived.
   "You intend to introduce the prince?" asked Colia, as they went up.
   "Yes, my boy. I wish to present him: General Ivolgin and Prince Muishkin! But
 what's the matter? what? How is Marfa Borisovna?"
   "You know, father, you would have done much better not to come at all! She is
 ready to eat you up! You have not shown yourself since the day before yesterday
 and she is expecting the money.
   Why did you promise her any? You are always the same! Well, now you will have
 to get out of it as best you can."
   They stopped before a somewhat low doorway on the fourth floor.
   Ardalion Alexandrovitch, evidently much out of countenance, pushed Muishkin i
n front.
   "I will wait here," he stammered. "I should like to surprise her. "
   Colia entered first, and as the door stood open, the mistress of the house pe
eped out. The surprise of the general's imagination fell very flat, for she at o
nce began to address him in terms of reproach.
   Marfa Borisovna was about forty years of age. She wore a dressing-jacket, her
 feet were in slippers, her face painted, and her hair was in dozens of small pl
aits. No sooner did she catch sight of Ardalion Alexandrovitch than she screamed
:
   "There he is, that wicked, mean wretch! I knew it was he! My heart misgave me
!"
   The old man tried to put a good face on the affair.
   "Come, let us go in-it's all right," he whispered in the prince's ear.
   But it was more serious than he wished to think. As soon as the visitors had 
crossed the low dark hall, and entered the narrow reception-room, furnished with
 half a dozen cane chairs, and two small card-tables, Madame Terentieff, in the 
shrill tones habitual to her, continued her stream of invectives.
   "Are you not ashamed? Are you not ashamed? You barbarian! You tyrant! You hav
e robbed me of all I possessed-you have sucked my bones to the marrow. How long 
shall I be your victim? Shameless, dishonourable man!"
   "Marfa Borisovna! Marfa Borisovna! Here is the Prince Muishkin! General Ivolgi
n and Prince Muishkin," stammered the disconcerted old man.
   "Would you believe," said the mistress of the house, suddenly addressing the 
prince, "would you believe that that man has not even spared my orphan children?
 He has stolen everything I possessed, sold everything, pawned everything; he ha
s left me nothing-nothing! What am I to do with your IOU's, you cunning, unscrup
ulous rogue? Answer, devourer I answer, heart of stone!
   How shall I feed my orphans? with what shall I nourish them? And now he has c
ome, he is drunk! He can scarcely stand. How, oh how, have I offended the Almigh
ty, that He should bring this curse upon me! Answer, you worthless villain, answ
er!"
   But this was too much for the general.
   "Here are twenty-five roubles, Marfa Borisovna it is all that I can give and I 
owe even these to the prince's generosity-my noble friend. I have been cruelly d
eceived. Such is life Now Excuse me, I am very weak," he continued, standing in the
 centre of the room, and bowing to all sides. "I am faint; excuse me! Lenotchka a
 cushion my dear!"
   Lenotchka, a little girl of eight, ran to fetch the cushion at once, and plac
ed it on the rickety old sofa. The general meant to have said much more, but as 
soon as he had stretched himself out, he turned his face to the wall, and slept 
the sleep of the just.
   With a grave and ceremonious air, Marfa Borisovna motioned the prince to a ch
air at one of the card-tables. She seated herself opposite, leaned her right che
ek on her hand, and sat in silence, her eyes fixed on Muishkin, now and again si
ghing deeply. The three children, two little girls and a boy, Lenotchka being th
e eldest, came and leant on the table and also stared steadily at him. Presently
 Colia appeared from the adjoining room.
   "I am very glad indeed to have met you here, Colia," said the prince. "Can yo
u do something for me? I must see Nastasia Philipovna, and I asked Ardalion Alex
androvitch just now to take me to her house, but he has gone to sleep, as you se
e. Will you show me the way, for I do not know the street? I have the address, t
hough; it is close to the Grand Theatre."
   "Nastasia Philipovna? She does not live there, and to tell you the truth my f
ather has never been to her house! It is strange that you should have depended o
n him! She lives near Wladimir Street, at the Five Corners, and it is quite clos
e by. Will you go directly? It is just half-past nine. I will show you the way w
ith pleasure."
   Colia and the prince went off together. Alas! the latter had no money to pay 
for a cab, so they were obliged to walk.
   "I should have liked to have taken you to see Hippolyte," said Colia. "He is 
the eldest son of the lady you met just now, and was in the next room. He is ill
, and has been in bed all day. But he is rather strange, and extremely sensitive
, and I thought he might be upset considering the circumstances in which you cam
e Somehow it touches me less, as it concerns my father, while it is HIS mother. T
hat, of course, makes a great difference. What is a terrible disgrace to a woman
, does not disgrace a man, at least not in the same way. Perhaps public opinion 
is wrong in condemning one sex, and excusing the other.
   Hippolyte is an extremely clever boy, but so prejudiced. He is really a slave
 to his opinions."
   "Do you say he is consumptive?"
   "Yes. It really would be happier for him to die young. If I were in his place
 I should certainly long for death. He is unhappy about his brother and sisters,
 the children you saw. If it were possible, if we only had a little money, we sh
ould leave our respective families, and live together in a little apartment of o
ur own. It is our dream. But, do you know, when I was talking over your affair w
ith him, he was angry, and said that anyone who did not call out a man who had g
iven him a blow was a coward. He is very irritable to-day, and I left off arguin
g the matter with him. So Nastasia Philipovna has invited you to go and see her?
"
   "To tell the truth, she has not."
   "Then how do you come to be going there?" cried Colia, so much astonished tha
t he stopped short in the middle of the pavement.
   "And and are you going to her At Home in that costume?"
   "I don't know, really, whether I shall be allowed in at all. If she will rece
ive me, so much the better. If not, the matter is ended. As to my clothes-what c
an I do?"
   "Are you going there for some particular reason, or only as a way of getting 
into her society, and that of her friends?"
   "No, I have really an object in going That is, I am going on business it is di
fficult to explain, but"
   "Well, whether you go on business or not is your affair, I do not want to kno
w. The only important thing, in my eyes, is that you should not be going there s
imply for the pleasure of spending your evening in such company-cocottes, genera
ls, usurers! If that were the case I should despise and laugh at you.
   There are terribly few honest people here, and hardly any whom one can respec
t, although people put on airs-Varia especially!
   Have you noticed, prince, how many adventurers there are nowadays? Especially
 here, in our dear Russia. How it has happened I never can understand. There use
d to be a certain amount of solidity in all things, but now what happens?
   Everything is exposed to the public gaze, veils are thrown back, every wound 
is probed by careless fingers. We are for ever present at an orgy of scandalous 
revelations. Parents blush when they remember their old-fashioned morality. At M
oscow lately a father was heard urging his son to stop at nothing-at nothing, mi
nd you!-to get money! The press seized upon the story, of course, and now it is 
public property. Look at my father, the general! See what he is, and yet, I assu
re you, he is an honest man! Only he drinks too much, and his morals are not all 
we could desire. Yes, that's true! I pity him, to tell the truth, but I dare not
 say so, because everybody would laugh at me-but I do pity him! And who are the 
really clever men, after all? Moneygrubbers, every one of them, from the first t
o the last.
   Hippolyte finds excuses for money-lending, and says it is a necessity. He tal
ks about the economic movement, and the ebb and flow of capital; the devil knows
 what he means. It makes me angry to hear him talk so, but he is soured by his t
roubles. Just imagine-the general keeps his mother-but she lends him money! She 
lends it for a week or ten days at very high interest! Isn't it disgusting? And 
then, you would hardly believe it, but my mother-Nina Alexandrovna-helps Hippoly
te in all sorts of ways, sends him money and clothes. She even goes as far as he
lping the children, through Hippolyte, because their mother cares nothing about 
them, and Varia does the same."
   "Well, just now you said there were no honest nor good people about, that the
re were only money-grubbers-and here they are quite close at hand, these honest 
and good people, your mother and Varia! I think there is a good deal of moral st
rength in helping people in suchcircum stances."
   "Varia does it from pride, and likes showing off, and giving herself airs. As
 to my mother, I really do admire her-yes, and honour her. Hippolyte, hardened a
s he is, feels it. He laughed at first, and thought it vulgar of her-but now, he
 is sometimes quite touched and overcome by her kindness. H'm! You call that bei
ng strong and good? I will remember that! Gania knows nothing about it. He would
 say that it was encouraging vice."
   "Ah, Gania knows nothing about it? It seems there are many things that Gania 
does not know," exclaimed the prince, as he considered Colia's last words.
   "Do you know, I like you very much indeed, prince? I shall never forget about
 this afternoon."
   "I like you too, Colia."
   "Listen to me! You are going to live here, are you not?" said Colia. "I mean 
to get something to do directly, and earn money.
   Then shall we three live together? You, and I, and Hippolyte? We will hire a 
flat, and let the general come and visit us. What do you say?"
   "It would be very pleasant," returned the prince. "But we must see.
   I am really rather worried just now. What! are we there already?
   Is that the house? What a long flight of steps! And there's a porter! Well, C
olia I don't know what will come of it all."
   The prince seemed quite distracted for the moment.
   "You must tell me all about it tomorrow! Don't be afraid. I wish you success;
 we agree so entirely I that can do so, although I do not understand why you are
 here. Good-bye!" cried Colia excitedly.
   "Now I will rush back and tell Hippolyte all about our plans and proposals! B
ut as to your getting in-don't be in the least afraid. You will see her. She is 
so original about everything. It's the first floor. The porter will show you."
      XIII.
   THE prince was very nervous as he reached the outer door; but he did his best
 to encourage himself with the reflection that the worst thing that could happen
 to him would be that he would not be received, or, perhaps, received, then laug
hed at for coming.
   But there was another question, which terrified him considerably, and that wa
s: what was he going to do when he DID get in? And to this question he could fas
hion no satisfactory reply.
   If only he could find an opportunity of coming close up to Nastasia Philipovn
a and saying to her: "Don't ruin yourself by marrying this man. He does not love
 you, he only loves your money. He told me so himself, and so did Aglaya Ivanovn
a, and I have come on purpose to warn you"-but even that did not seem quite a le
gitimate or practicable thing to do. Then, again, there was another delicate que
stion, to which he could not find an answer; dared not, in fact, think of it; bu
t at the very idea of which he trembled and blushed. However, in spite of all hi
s fears and heart-quakings he went in, and asked for Nastasia Philipovna.
   Nastasia occupied a medium-sized, but distinctly tasteful, flat, beautifully 
furnished and arranged. At one period of these five years of Petersburg life, To
tski had certainly not spared his expenditure upon her. He had calculated upon h
er eventual love, and tried to tempt her with a lavish outlay upon comforts and 
luxuries, knowing too well how easily the heart accustoms itself to comforts, an
d how difficult it is to tear one's self away from luxuries which have become ha
bitual and, little by little, indispensable.
   Nastasia did not reject all this, she even loved her comforts and luxuries, b
ut, strangely enough, never became, in the least degree, dependent upon them, an
d always gave the impression that she could do just as well without them. In fac
t, she went so far as to inform Totski on several occasions that such was the ca
se, which the latter gentleman considered a very unpleasant communication indeed
.
   But, of late, Totski had observed many strange and original features and char
acteristics in Nastasia, which he had neither known nor reckoned upon in former 
times, and some of these fascinated him, even now, in spite of the fact that all
 his old calculations with regard to her were long ago cast to the winds.
   A maid opened the door for the prince (Nastasia's servants were all females) 
and, to his surprise, received his request to announce him to her mistress witho
ut any astonishment. Neither his dirty boots, nor his wide-brimmed hat, nor his 
sleeveless cloak, nor his evident confusion of manner, produced the least impres
sion upon her. She helped him off with his cloak, and begged him to wait a momen
t in the ante-room while she announced him.
   The company assembled at Nastasia Philipovna's consisted of none but her most
 intimate friends, and formed a very small party in comparison with her usual ga
therings on this anniversary.
   In the first place there were present Totski, and General Epanchin. They were
 both highly amiable, but both appeared to be labouring under a half-hidden feel
ing of anxiety as to the result of Nastasia's deliberations with regard to Gania
, which result was to be made public this evening.
   Then, of course, there was Gania who was by no means so amiable as his elders
, but stood apart, gloomy, and miserable, and silent. He had determined not to b
ring Varia with him; but Nastasia had not even asked after her, though no sooner
 had he arrived than she had reminded him of the episode between himself and the
 prince. The general, who had heard nothing of it before, began to listen with s
ome interest, while Gania, drily, but with perfect candour, went through the who
le history, including the fact of his apology to the prince. He finished by decl
aring that the prince was a most extraordinary man, and goodness knows why he ha
d been considered an idiot hitherto, for he was very far from being one.
   Nastasia listened to all this with great interest; but the conversation soon 
turned to Rogojin and his visit, and this theme proved of the greatest attractio
n to both Totski and the general.
   Ptitsin was able to afford some particulars as to Rogojin's conduct since the
 afternoon. He declared that he had been busy finding money for the latter ever 
since, and up to nine o'clock, Rogojin having declared that he must absolutely h
ave a hundred thousand roubles by the evening. He added that Rogojin was drunk, 
of course; but that he thought the money would be forthcoming, for the excited a
nd intoxicated rapture of the fellow impelled him to give any interest or premiu
m that was asked of him, and there were several others engaged in beating up the
 money, also.
   All this news was received by the company with somewhat gloomy interest. Nast
asia was silent, and would not say what she thought about it. Gania was equally 
uncommunicative. The general seemed the most anxious of all, and decidedly uneas
y. The present of pearls which he had prepared with so much joy in the morning h
ad been accepted but coldly, and Nastasia had smiled rather disagreeably as she 
took it from him. Ferdishenko was the only person present in good spirits.
   Totski himself, who had the reputation of being a capital talker, and was usu
ally the life and soul of these entertainments, was as silent as any on this occ
asion, and sat in a state of, for him, most uncommon perturbation.
   The rest of the guests (an old tutor or schoolmaster, goodness knows why invi
ted; a young man, very timid, and shy and silent; a rather loud woman of about f
orty, apparently an actress; and a very pretty, well-dressed German lady who har
dly said a word all the evening) not only had no gift for enlivening the proceed
ings, but hardly knew what to say for themselves when addressed. Under these cir
cumstances the arrival of the prince came almost as a godsend.
   The announcement of his name gave rise to some surprise and to some smiles, e
specially when it became evident, from Nastasia's astonished look, that she had 
not thought of inviting him. But her astonishment once over, Nastasia showed suc
h satisfaction that all prepared to greet the prince with cordial smiles of welc
ome.
   "Of course," remarked General Epanchin, "he does this out of pure innocence. 
It's a little dangerous, perhaps, to encourage this sort of freedom; but it is r
ather a good thing that he has arrived just at this moment. He may enliven us a 
little with his originalities."
   "Especially as he asked himself," said Ferdishenko.
   "What's that got to do with it?" asked the general, who loathed Ferdishenko.
   "Why, he must pay toll for his entrance," explained the latter.
   "H'm! Prince Muishkin is not Ferdishenko," said the general, impatiently. Thi
s worthy gentleman could never quite reconcile himself to the idea of meeting Fe
rdishenko in society, and on an equal footing.
   "Oh general, spare Ferdishenko!" replied the other, smiling. "I have special 
privileges."
   "What do you mean by special privileges?"
   "Once before I had the honour of stating them to the company. I will repeat t
he explanation to-day for your excellency's benefit.
   You see, excellency, all the world is witty and clever except myself. I am ne
ither. As a kind of compensation I am allowed to tell the truth, for it is a wel
l-known fact that only stupid people tell 'the truth. Added to this, I am a spit
eful man, just because I am not clever. If I am offended or injured I bear it qu
ite patiently until the man injuring me meets with some misfortune. Then I remem
ber, and take my revenge. I return the injury sevenfold, as Ivan Petrovitch Ptit
sin says. (Of course he never does so himself.) Excellency, no doubt you recolle
ct Kryloff's fable, 'The Lion and the Ass'? Well now, that's you and I. That fab
le was written precisely for us."
   "You seem to be talking nonsense again, Ferdishenko," growled the general.
   "What is the matter, excellency? I know how to keep my place.
   When I said just now that we, you and I, were the lion and the ass of Kryloff
's fable, of course it is understood that I take the role of the ass. Your excel
lency is the lion of which the fable remarks: 'A mighty lion, terror of the wood
s, Was shorn of his great prowess by old age.'
   And I, your excellency, am the ass."
   "I am of your opinion on that last point," said Ivan Fedorovitch, with ill-co
ncealed irritation.
   All this was no doubt extremely coarse, and moreover it was premeditated, but
 after all Ferdishenko had persuaded everyone to accept him as a buffoon.
   "If I am admitted and tolerated here," he had said one day, "it is simply bec
ause I talk in this way. How can anyone possibly receive such a man as I am? I q
uite understand. Now, could I, a Ferdishenko, be allowed to sit shoulder to shou
lder with a clever man like Afanasy Ivanovitch? There is one explanation, only o
ne.
   I am given the position because it is so entirely inconceivable!"
   But these vulgarities seemed to please Nastasia Philipovna, although too ofte
n they were both rude and offensive. Those who wished to go to her house were fo
rced to put up with Ferdishenko.
   Possibly the latter was not mistaken in imagining that he was received simply
 in order to annoy Totski, who disliked him extremely. Gania also was often made
 the butt of the jester's sarcasms, who used this method of keeping in Nastasia 
Philipovna's good graces.
   "The prince will begin by singing us a fashionable ditty," remarked Ferdishen
ko, and looked at the mistress of the house, to see what she would say.
   "I don't think so, Ferdishenko; please be quiet," answered Nastasia Philipovn
a dryly.
   "A-ah! if he is to be under special patronage, I withdraw my claws."
   But Nastasia Philipovna had now risen and advanced to meet the prince.
   "I was so sorry to have forgotten to ask you to come, when I saw you," she sa
id, "and I am delighted to be able to thank you personally now, and to express m
y pleasure at your resolution."
   So saying she gazed into his eyes, longing to see whether she could make any 
guess as to the explanation of his motive in coming to her house. The prince wou
ld very likely have made some reply to her kind words, but he was so dazzled by 
her appearance that he could not speak.
   Nastasia noticed this with satisfaction. She was in full dress this evening; 
and her appearance was certainly calculated to impress all beholders. She took h
is hand and led him towards her other guests. But just before they reached the d
rawing-room door, the prince stopped her, and hurriedly and in great agitation w
hispered to her:
   "You are altogether perfection; even your pallor and thinness are perfect; on
e could not wish you otherwise. I did so wish to come and see you. I-forgive me,
 please-"
   "Don't apologize," said Nastasia, laughing; "you spoil the whole originality 
of the thing. I think what they say about you must be true, that you are so orig
inal.-So you think me perfection, do you?"
   "Yes."
   "H'm! Well, you may be a good reader of riddles but you are wrong THERE, at a
ll events. I'll remind you of this, tonight."
   Nastasia introduced the prince to her guests, to most of whom he was already 
known.
   Totski immediately made some amiable remark. Al seemed to brighten up at once
, and the conversation became general.
   Nastasia made the prince sit down next to herself.
   "Dear me, there's nothing so very curious about the prince dropping in, after
 all," remarked Ferdishenko.
   "It's quite a clear case," said the hitherto silent Gania. I have watched the
 prince almost all day, ever since the moment when he first saw Nastasia Philipo
vna's portrait, at General Epanchin's.
   I remember thinking at the time what I am now pretty sure of; and what, I may
 say in passing, the prince confessed to myself."
   Gania said all this perfectly seriously, and without the slightest appearance
 of joking; indeed, he seemed strangely gloomy.
   "I did not confess anything to you," said the prince, blushing.
   "I only answered your question."
   "Bravo! That's frank, at any rate!" shouted Ferdishenko, and there was genera
l laughter.
   "Oh prince, prince! I never should have thought it of you;" said General Epan
chin. "And I imagined you a philosopher! Oh, you silent fellows!"
   "Judging from the fact that the prince blushed at this innocent joke, like a 
young girl, I should think that he must, as an honourable man, harbour the noble
st intentions," said the old toothless schoolmaster, most unexpectedly; he had n
ot so much as opened his mouth before. This remark provoked general mirth, and t
he old fellow himself laughed loudest of the lot, but ended with a stupendous fi
t of coughing.
   Nastasia Philipovna, who loved originality and drollery of all kinds, was app
arently very fond of this old man, and rang the bell for more tea to stop his co
ughing. It was now half-past ten o'clock.
   "Gentlemen, wouldn't you like a little champagne now?" she asked.
   "I have it all ready; it will cheer us up-do now-no ceremony!"
   This invitation to drink, couched, as it was, in such informal terms, came ve
ry strangely from Nastasia Philipovna. Her usual entertainments were not quite l
ike this; there was more style about them. However, the wine was not refused; ea
ch guest took a glass excepting Gania, who drank nothing.
   It was extremely difficult to account for Nastasia's strange condition of min
d, which became more evident each moment, and which none could avoid noticing.
   She took her glass, and vowed she would empty it three times that evening. Sh
e was hysterical, and laughed aloud every other minute with no apparent reason-t
he next moment relapsing into gloom and thoughtfulness.
   Some of her guests suspected that she must be ill; but concluded at last that
 she was expecting something, for she continued to look at her watch impatiently
 and unceasingly; she was most absent and strange.
   "You seem to be a little feverish tonight," said the actress.
   "Yes; I feel quite ill. I have been obliged to put on this shawl -I feel so c
old," replied Nastasia. She certainly had grown very pale, and every now and the
n she tried to suppress a trembling in her limbs.
   "Had we not better allow our hostess to retire?" asked Totski of the general.
   "Not at all, gentlemen, not at all! Your presence is absolutely necessary to 
me tonight," said Nastasia, significantly.
   As most of those present were aware that this evening a certain very importan
t decision was to be taken, these words of Nastasia Philipovna's appeared to be 
fraught with much hidden interest.
   The general and Totski exchanged looks; Gania fidgeted convulsively in his ch
air.
   "Let's play at some game!" suggested the actress.
   "I know a new and most delightful game, added Ferdishenko.
   "What is it?" asked the actress.
   "Well, when we tried it we were a party of people, like this, for instance; a
nd somebody proposed that each of us, without leaving his place at the table, sh
ould relate something about himself. It had to be something that he really and h
onestly considered the very worst action he had ever committed in his life. But 
he was to be honest-that was the chief point! He wasn't to be allowed to lie."
   "What an extraordinary idea!" said the general.
   "That's the beauty of it, general!"
   "It's a funny notion," said Totski, "and yet quite natural-it's only a new wa
y of boasting."
   "Perhaps that is just what was so fascinating about it."
   "Why, it would be a game to cry over-not to laugh at!" said the actress.
   "Did it succeed?" asked Nastasia Philipovna. "Come, let's try it, let's try i
t; we really are not quite so jolly as we might be-let's try it! We may like it;
 it's original, at all events!"
   "Yes," said Ferdishenko; "it's a good idea-come along-the men begin. Of cours
e no one need tell a story if he prefers to be disobliging. We must draw lots! T
hrow your slips of paper, gentlemen, into this hat, and the prince shall draw fo
r turns.
   It's a very simple game; all you have to do is to tell the story of the worst
 action of your life. It's as simple as anything.
   I'll prompt anyone who forgets the rules!"
   No one liked the idea much. Some smiled, some frowned some objected, but fain
tly, not wishing to oppose Nastasia's wishes; for this new idea seemed to be rat
her well received by her. She was still in an excited, hysterical state, laughin
g convulsively at nothing and everything. Her eyes were blazing, and her cheeks 
showed two bright red spots against the white. The melancholy appearance of some
 of her guests seemed to add to her sarcastic humour, and perhaps the very cynic
ism and cruelty of the game proposed by Ferdishenko pleased her. At all events s
he was attracted by the idea, and gradually her guests came round to her side; t
he thing was original, at least, and might turn out to be amusing. "And supposin
g it's something that one-one can't speak about before ladies?" asked the timid 
and silent young man.
   "Why, then of course, you won't say anything about it. As if there are not pl
enty of sins to your score without the need of those!" said Ferdishenko.
   "But I really don't know which of my actions is the worst," said the lively a
ctress.
   "Ladies are exempted if they like."
   "And how are you to know that one isn't lying? And if one lies the whole poin
t of the game is lost," said Gania.
   "Oh, but think how delightful to hear how one's friends lie!
   Besides you needn't be afraid, Gania; everybody knows what your worst action 
is without the need of any lying on your part. Only think, gentlemen,"-and Ferdi
shenko here grew quite enthusiastic,
   "only think with what eyes we shall observe one another tomorrow, after our t
ales have been told!"
   "But surely this is a joke, Nastasia Philipovna?" asked Totski.
   "You don't really mean us to play this game."
   "Whoever is afraid of wolves had better not go into the wood," said Nastasia,
 smiling.
   "But, pardon me, Mr. Ferdishenko, is it possible to make a game out of this k
ind of thing?" persisted Totski, growing more and more uneasy. "I assure you it 
can't be a success."
   "And why not? Why, the last time I simply told straight off about how I stole
 three roubles."
   "Perhaps so; but it is hardly possible that you told it so that it seemed lik
e truth, or so that you were believed. And, as Gavrila Ardalionovitch has said, 
the least suggestion of a falsehood takes all point out of the game. It seems to
 me that sincerity, on the other hand, is only possible if combined with a kind 
of bad taste that would be utterly out of place here."
   "How subtle you are, Afanasy Ivanovitch! You astonish me," cried Ferdishenko.
 "You will remark, gentleman, that in saying that I could not recount the story 
of my theft so as to be believed, Afanasy Ivanovitch has very ingeniously implie
d that I am not capable of thieving-(it would have been bad taste to say so open
ly); and all the time he is probably firmly convinced, in his own mind, that I a
m very well capable of it! But now, gentlemen, to business! Put in your slips, l
adies and gentlemen-is yours in, Mr. Totski? So-then we are all ready; now princ
e, draw, please."
   The prince silently put his hand into the hat, and drew the names. Ferdishenk
o was first, then Ptitsin, then the general, Totski next, his own fifth, then Ga
nia, and so on; the ladies did not draw.
   "Oh, dear! oh, dear!" cried Ferdishenko. "I did so hope the prince would come
 out first, and then the general. Well, gentlemen, I suppose I must set a good e
xample! What vexes me much is that I am such an insignificant creature that it m
atters nothing to anybody whether I have done bad actions or not!
   Besides, which am I to choose? It's an embarras de richesse.
   Shall I tell how I became a thief on one occasion only, to convince Afanasy I
vanovitch that it is possible to steal without being a thief?"
   "Do go on, Ferdishenko, and don't make unnecessary preface, or you'll never f
inish," said Nastasia Philipovna. All observed how irritable and cross she had b
ecome since her last burst of laughter; but none the less obstinately did she st
ick to her absurd whim about this new game. Totski sat looking miserable enough.
 The general lingered over his champagne, and seemed to be thinking of some stor
y for the time when his turn should come.
      XIV.
   "I have no wit, Nastasia Philipovna," began Ferdishenko, "and therefore I tal
k too much, perhaps. Were I as witty, now, as Mr.
   Totski or the general, I should probably have sat silent all the evening, as 
they have. Now, prince, what do you think?-are there not far more thieves than h
onest men in this world? Don't you think we may say there does not exist a singl
e person so honest that he has never stolen anything whatever in his life?"
   "What a silly idea," said the actress. "Of course it is not the case. I have 
never stolen anything, for one."
   "H'm! very well, Daria Alexeyevna; you have not stolen anything-agreed. But h
ow about the prince, now-look how he is blushing!"
   "I think you are partially right, but you exaggerate," said the prince, who h
ad certainly blushed up, of a sudden, for some reason or other.
   "Ferdishenko-either tell us your story, or be quiet, and mind your own busine
ss. You exhaust all patience," cuttingly and irritably remarked Nastasia Philipo
vna.
   "Immediately, immediately! As for my story, gentlemen, it is too stupid and a
bsurd to tell you.
   "I assure you I am not a thief, and yet I have stolen; I cannot explain why. 
It was at Semeon Ivanovitch Ishenka's country house, one Sunday. He had a dinner
 party. After dinner the men stayed at the table over their wine. It struck me t
o ask the daughter of the house to play something on the piano; so I passed thro
ugh the corner room to join the ladies. In that room, on Maria Ivanovna's writin
g-table, I observed a three-rouble note. She must have taken it out for some pur
pose, and left it lying there. There was no one about. I took up the note and pu
t it in my pocket; why, I can't say. I don't know what possessed me to do it, bu
t it was done, and I went quickly back to the dining-room and reseated myself at
 the dinner-table. I sat and waited there in a great state of excitement. I talk
ed hard, and told lots of stories, and laughed like mad; then I joined the ladie
s.
   "In half an hour or so the loss was discovered, and the servants were being p
ut under examination. Daria, the housemaid was suspected. I exhibited the greate
st interest and sympathy, and I remember that poor Daria quite lost her head, an
d that I began assuring her, before everyone, that I would guarantee her forgive
ness on the part of her mistress, if she would confess her guilt. They all stare
d at the girl, and I remember a wonderful attraction in the reflection that here
 was I sermonizing away, with the money in my own pocket all the while. I went a
nd spent the three roubles that very evening at a restaurant. I went in and aske
d for a bottle of Lafite, and drank it up; I wanted to be rid of the money.
   "I did not feel much remorse either then or afterwards; but I would not repea
t the performance-believe it or not as you please. There-that's all."
   "Only, of course that's not nearly your worst action," said the actress, with
 evident dislike in her face.
   "That was a psychological phenomenon, not an action," remarked Totski.
   "And what about the maid?" asked Nastasia Philipovna, with undisguised contem
pt.
   "Oh, she was turned out next day, of course. It's a very strict household, th
ere!"
   "And you allowed it?"
   "I should think so, rather! I was not going to return and confess next day," 
laughed Ferdishenko, who seemed a little surprised at the disagreeable impressio
n which his story had made on all parties.
   "How mean you were!" said Nastasia.
   "Bah! you wish to hear a man tell of his worst actions, and you expect the st
ory to come out goody-goody! One's worst actions always are mean. We shall see w
hat the general has to say for himself now. All is not gold that glitters, you k
now; and because a man keeps his carriage he need not be specially virtuous, I a
ssure you, all sorts of people keep carriages. And by what means?"
   In a word, Ferdishenko was very angry and rapidly forgetting himself; his who
le face was drawn with passion. Strange as it may appear, he had expected much b
etter success for his story. These little errors of taste on Ferdishenko's part 
occurred very frequently. Nastasia trembled with rage, and looked fixedly at him
, whereupon he relapsed into alarmed silence. He realized that he had gone a lit
tle too far.
   "Had we not better end this game?" asked Totski.
   "It's my turn, but I plead exemption," said Ptitsin.
   "You don't care to oblige us?" asked Nastasia.
   "I cannot, I assure you. I confess I do not understand how anyone can play th
is game."
   "Then, general, it's your turn," continued Nastasia Philipovna,
   "and if you refuse, the whole game will fall through, which will disappoint m
e very much, for I was looking forward to relating a certain 'page of my own lif
e.' I am only waiting for you and Afanasy Ivanovitch to have your turns, for I r
equire the support of your example," she added, smiling.
   "Oh, if you put it in that way " cried the general, excitedly,
   "I'm ready to tell the whole story of my life, but I must confess that I prep
ared a little story in anticipation of my turn."
   Nastasia smiled amiably at him; but evidently her depression and irritability
 were increasing with every moment. Totski was dreadfully alarmed to hear her pr
omise a revelation out of her own life.
   "I, like everyone else," began the general, "have committed certain not altog
ether graceful actions, so to speak, during the course of my life. But the stran
gest thing of all in my case is, that I should consider the little anecdote whic
h I am now about to give you as a confession of the worst of my 'bad actions.' I
t is thirty-five years since it all happened, and yet I cannot to this very day 
recall the circumstances without, as it were, a sudden pang at the heart.
   "It was a silly affair-I was an ensign at the time. You know ensigns-their bl
ood is boiling water, their circumstances generally penurious. Well, I had a ser
vant Nikifor who used to do everything for me in my quarters, economized and man
aged for me, and even laid hands on anything he could find (belonging to other p
eople), in order to augment our household goods; but a faithful, honest fellow a
ll the same.
   "I was strict, but just by nature. At that time we were stationed in a small 
town. I was quartered at an old widow's house, a lieutenant's widow of eighty ye
ars of age. She lived in a wretched little wooden house, and had not even a serv
ant, so poor was she.
   "Her relations had all died off-her husband was dead and buried forty years s
ince; and a niece, who had lived with her and bullied her up to three years ago,
 was dead too; so that she was quite alone.
   "Well, I was precious dull with her, especially as she was so childish that t
here was nothing to be got out of her. Eventually, she stole a fowl of mine; the
 business is a mystery to this day; but it could have been no one but herself. I
 requested to be quartered somewhere else, and was shifted to the other end of t
he town, to the house of a merchant with a large family, and a long beard, as I 
remember him. Nikifor and I were delighted to go; but the old lady was not pleas
ed at our departure.
   "Well, a day or two afterwards, when I returned from drill, Nikifor says to m
e: 'We oughtn't to have left our tureen with the old lady, I've nothing to serve
 the soup in.' "I asked how it came about that the tureen had been left. Nikifor
 explained that the old lady refused to give it up, because, she said, we had br
oken her bowl, and she must have our tureen in place of it; she had declared tha
t I had so arranged the matter with herself.
   "This baseness on her part of course aroused my young blood to fever heat; I 
jumped up, and away I flew.
   "I arrived at the old woman's house beside myself. She was sitting in a corne
r all alone, leaning her face on her hand. I fell on her like a clap of thunder.
 'You old wretch!' I yelled and all that sort of thing, in real Russian style. W
ell, when I began cursing at her, a strange thing happened. I looked at her, and
 she stared back with her eyes starting out of her head, but she did not say a w
ord. She seemed to sway about as she sat, and looked and looked at me in the str
angest way. Well, I soon stopped swearing and looked closer at her, asked her qu
estions, but not a word could I get out of her. The flies were buzzing about the
 room and only this sound broke the silence; the sun was setting outside; I didn
't know what to make of it, so I went away.
   "Before I reached home I was met and summoned to the major's, so that it was 
some while before I actually got there. When I came in, Nikifor met me. 'Have yo
u heard, sir, that our old lady is dead?' 'DEAD, when?' 'Oh, an hour and a half 
ago.' That meant nothing more nor less than that she was dying at the moment whe
n I pounced on her and began abusing her.
   "This produced a great effect upon me. I used to dream of the poor old woman 
at nights. I really am not superstitious, but two days after, I went to her fune
ral, and as time went on I thought more and more about her. I said to myself, 'T
his woman, this human being, lived to a great age. She had children, a husband a
nd family, friends and relations; her household was busy and cheerful; she was s
urrounded by smiling faces; and then suddenly they are gone, and she is left alo
ne like a solitary fly like a fly, cursed with the burden of her age. At last, Go
d calls her to Himself. At sunset, on a lovely summer's evening, my little old w
oman passes away-a thought, you will notice, which offers much food for reflecti
on-and behold! instead of tears and prayers to start her on her last journey, sh
e has insults and jeers from a young ensign, who stands before her with his hand
s in his pockets, making a terrible row about a soup tureen!' Of course I was to
 blame, and even now that I have time to look back at it calmly, I pity the poor
 old thing no less. I repeat that I wonder at myself, for after all I was not re
ally responsible. Why did she take it into her head to die at that moment? But t
he more I thought of it, the more I felt the weight of it upon my mind; and I ne
ver got quite rid of the impression until I put a couple of old women into an al
mshouse and kept them there at my own expense. There, that's all. I repeat I dar
e say I have committed many a grievous sin in my day; but I cannot help always l
ooking back upon this as the worst action I have ever perpetrated."
   "H'm! and instead of a bad action, your excellency has detailed one of your n
oblest deeds," said Ferdishenko. "Ferdishenko is 'done.'"
   "Dear me, general," said Nastasia Philipovna, absently, "I really never imagi
ned you had such a good heart."
   The general laughed with great satisfaction, and applied himself once more to
 the champagne.
   It was now Totski's turn, and his story was awaited with great curiosity-whil
e all eyes turned on Nastasia Philipovna, as though anticipating that his revela
tion must be connected somehow with her. Nastasia, during the whole of his story
, pulled at the lace trimming of her sleeve, and never once glanced at the speak
er. Totski was a handsome man, rather stout, with a very polite and dignified ma
nner. He was always well dressed, and his linen was exquisite. He had plump whit
e hands, and wore a magnificent diamond ring on one finger.
   "What simplifies the duty before me considerably, in my opinion," he began, "
is that I am bound to recall and relate the very worst action of my life. In suc
h circumstances there can, of course, be no doubt. One's conscience very soon in
forms one what is the proper narrative to tell. I admit, that among the many sil
ly and thoughtless actions of my life, the memory of one comes prominently forwa
rd and reminds me that it lay long like a stone on my heart. Some twenty years s
ince, I paid a visit to Platon Ordintzeff at his country-house. He had just been
 elected marshal of the nobility, and had come there with his young wife for the
 winter holidays. Anfisa Alexeyevna's birthday came off just then, too, and ther
e were two balls arranged. At that time Dumas-fils' beautiful work, La Dame aux 
Camelias-a novel which I consider imperishable-had just come into fashion. In th
e provinces all the ladies were in raptures over it, those who had read it, at l
east.
   Camellias were all the fashion. Everyone inquired for them, everybody wanted 
them; and a grand lot of camellias are to be got in a country town-as you all kn
ow-and two balls to provide for!
   "Poor Peter Volhofskoi was desperately in love with Anfisa Alexeyevna. I don'
t know whether there was anything-I mean I don't know whether he could possibly 
have indulged in any hope.
   The poor fellow was beside himself to get her a bouquet of camellias. Countes
s Sotski and Sophia Bespalova, as everyone knew, were coming with white camellia
 bouquets. Anfisa wished for red ones, for effect. Well, her husband Platon was 
driven desperate to find some. And the day before the ball, Anfisa's rival snapp
ed up the only red camellias to be had in the place, from under Platon's nose, a
nd Platon-wretched man-was done for.
   Now if Peter had only been able to step in at this moment with a red bouquet,
 his little hopes might have made gigantic strides. A woman's gratitude under su
ch circumstances would have been boundless-but it was practically an impossibili
ty.
   "The night before the ball I met Peter, looking radiant. 'What is it?' I ask.
 'I've found them, Eureka!" 'No! where, where?' 'At Ekshaisk (a little town fift
een miles off) there's a rich old merchant, who keeps a lot of canaries, has no 
children, and he and his wife are devoted to flowers. He's got some camellias.'
   'And what if he won't let you have them?' 'I'll go on my knees and implore ti
ll I get them. I won't go away.' 'When shall you start?' 'Tomorrow morning at fi
ve o'clock.' 'Go on,' I said, 'and good luck to you.' "I was glad for the poor f
ellow, and went home. But an idea got hold of me somehow. I don't know how. It w
as nearly two in the morning. I rang the bell and ordered the coachman to be wak
ed up and sent to me. He came. I gave him a tip of fifteen roubles, and told him
 to get the carriage ready at once. In half an hour it was at the door. I got in
 and off we went.
   "By five I drew up at the Ekshaisky inn. I waited there till dawn, and soon a
fter six I was off, and at the old merchant Trepalaf's.
   "'Camellias!' I said, 'father, save me, save me, let me have some camellias!'
 He was a tall, grey old man-a terrible-looking old gentleman. 'Not a bit of it,
' he says. 'I won't.' Down I went on my knees. 'Don't say so, don't-think what y
ou're doing!' I cried; 'it's a matter of life and death!' 'If that's the case, t
ake them,' says he. So up I get, and cut such a bouquet of red camellias! He had
 a whole greenhouse full of them-lovely ones.
   The old fellow sighs. I pull out a hundred roubles. 'No, no!' says he, 'don't
 insult me that way.' 'Oh, if that's the case, give it to the village hospital,'
 I say. 'Ah,' he says, 'that's quite a different matter; that's good of you and 
generous. I'll pay it in there for you with pleasure.' I liked that old fellow, 
Russian to the core, de la vraie souche. I went home in raptures, but took anoth
er road in order to avoid Peter. Immediately on arriving I sent up the bouquet f
or Anfisa to see when she awoke.
   "You may imagine her ecstasy, her gratitude. The wretched Platon, who had alm
ost died since yesterday of the reproaches showered upon him, wept on my shoulde
r. Of course poor Peter had no chance after this.
   "I thought he would cut my throat at first, and went about armed ready to mee
t him. But he took it differently; he fainted, and had brain fever and convulsio
ns. A month after, when he had hardly recovered, he went off to the Crimea, and 
there he was shot.
   "I assure you this business left me no peace for many a long year. Why did I 
do it? I was not in love with her myself; I'm afraid it was simply mischief-pure
 'cussedness' on my part.
   "If I hadn't seized that bouquet from under his nose he might have been alive
 now, and a happy man. He might have been successful in life, and never have gon
e to fight the Turks."
   Totski ended his tale with the same dignity that had characterized its commen
cement.
   Nastasia Philipovna's eyes were flashing in a most unmistakable way, now; and
 her lips were all a-quiver by the time Totski finished his story.
   All present watched both of them with curiosity.
   "You were right, Totski," said Nastasia, "it is a dull game and a stupid one.
 I'll just tell my story, as I promised, and then we'll play cards."
   "Yes, but let's have the story first!" cried the general.
   "Prince," said Nastasia Philipovna, unexpectedly turning to Muishkin, "here a
re my old friends, Totski and General Epanchin, who wish to marry me off. Tell m
e what you think. Shall I marry or not? As you decide, so shall it be."
   Totski grew white as a sheet. The general was struck dumb. All present starte
d and listened intently. Gania sat rooted to his chair.
   "Marry whom?" asked the prince, faintly.
   "Gavrila Ardalionovitch Ivolgin," said Nastasia, firmly and evenly.
   There were a few seconds of dead silence.
   The prince tried to speak, but could not form his words; a great weight seeme
d to lie upon his breast and suffocate him.
   "N-no! don't marry him!" he whispered at last, drawing his breath with an eff
ort.
   "So be it, then. Gavrila Ardalionovitch," she spoke solemnly and forcibly, "y
ou hear the prince's decision? Take it as my decision; and let that be the end o
f the matter for good and all."
   "Nastasia Philipovna!" cried Totski, in a quaking voice.
   "Nastasia Philipovna!" said the general, in persuasive but agitated tones.
   Everyone in the room fidgeted in their places, and waited to see what was com
ing next.
   "Well, gentlemen!" she continued, gazing around in apparent astonishment; "wh
at do you all look so alarmed about? Why are you so upset?"
   "But-recollect, Nastasia Philipovna." stammered Totski, "you gave a promise, 
quite a free one, and-and you might have spared us this. I am confused and bewil
dered, I know; but, in a word, at such a moment, and before company, and all so-
so-irregular, finishing off a game with a serious matter like this, a matter of 
honour, and of heart, and-"
   "I don't follow you, Afanasy Ivanovitch; you are losing your head. In the fir
st place, what do you mean by 'before company'?
   Isn't the company good enough for you? And what's all that about 'a game'? I 
wished to tell my little story, and I told it! Don't you like it? You heard what
 I said to the prince? 'As you decide, so it shall be!' If he had said 'yes,' I 
should have given my consent! But he said 'no,' so I refused. Here was my whole 
life hanging on his one word! Surely I was serious enough?"
   "The prince! What on earth has the prince got to do with it? Who the deuce is
 the prince?" cried the general, who could conceal his wrath no longer.
   "The prince has this to do with it-that I see in him. for the first time in a
ll my life, a man endowed with real truthfulness of spirit, and I trust him. He 
trusted me at first sight, and I trust him!"
   "It only remains for me, then, to thank Nastasia Philipovna for the great del
icacy with which she has treated me," said Gania, as pale as death, and with qui
vering lips. "That is my plain duty, of course; but the prince-what has he to do
 in the matter?"
   "I see what you are driving at," said Nastasia Philipovna. "You imply that th
e prince is after the seventy-five thousand roubles -I quite understand you. Mr.
 Totski, I forgot to say, 'Take your seventy-five thousand roubles'-I don't want
 them. I let you go free for nothing take your freedom! You must need it. Nine y
ears and three months' captivity is enough for anybody. Tomorrow I shall start a
fresh-today I am a free agent for the first time in my life.
   "General, you must take your pearls back, too-give them to your wife-here the
y are! Tomorrow I shall leave this flat altogether, and then there'll be no more
 of these pleasant little social gatherings, ladies and gentlemen."
   So saying, she scornfully rose from her seat as though to depart.
   "Nastasia Philipovna! Nastasia Philipovna!"
   The words burst involuntarily from every mouth. All present started up in bew
ildered excitement; all surrounded her; all had listened uneasily to her wild, d
isconnected sentences. All felt that something had happened, something had gone 
very far wrong indeed, but no one could make head or tail of the matter.
   At this moment there was a furious ring at the bell, and a great knock at the
 door-exactly similar to the one which had startled the company at Gania's house
 in the afternoon.
   "Ah, ah! here's the climax at last, at half-past twelve!" cried Nastasia Phil
ipovna. "Sit down, gentlemen, I beg you. Something is about to happen."
   So saying, she reseated herself; a strange smile played on her lips. She sat 
quite still, but watched the door in a fever of impatience.
   "Rogojin and his hundred thousand roubles, no doubt of it," muttered Ptitsin 
to himself.
      XV.
   Katia, the maid-servant, made her appearance, terribly frightened.
   "Goodness knows what it means, ma'am," she said. "There is a whole collection
 of men come-all tipsy-and want to see you. They say that 'it's Rogojin, and she
 knows all about it.'"
   "It's all right, Katia, let them all in at once."
   "Surely not ALL, ma'am? They seem so disorderly-it's dreadful to see them."
   "Yes ALL, Katia, all-every one of them. Let them in, or they'll come in wheth
er you like or no. Listen! what a noise they are making! Perhaps you are offende
d, gentlemen, that I should receive such guests in your presence? I am very sorr
y, and ask your forgiveness, but it cannot be helped-and I should be very gratef
ul if you could all stay and witness this climax. However, just as you please, o
f course."
   The guests exchanged glances; they were annoyed and bewildered by the episode
; but it was clear enough that all this had been prearranged and expected by Nas
tasia Philipovna, and that there was no use in trying to stop her now-for she wa
s little short of insane.
   Besides, they were naturally inquisitive to see what was to happen. There was
 nobody who would be likely to feel much alarm.
   There were but two ladies present; one of whom was the lively actress, who wa
s not easily frightened, and the other the silent German beauty who, it turned o
ut, did not understand a word of Russian, and seemed to be as stupid as she was 
lovely.
   Her acquaintances invited her to their "At Homes" because she was so decorati
ve. She was exhibited to their guests like a valuable picture, or vase, or statu
e, or firescreen. As for the men, Ptitsin was one of Rogojin's friends; Ferdishe
nko was as much at home as a fish in the sea, Gania, not yet recovered from his 
amazement, appeared to be chained to a pillory. The old professor did not in the
 least understand what was happening; but when he noticed how extremely agitated
 the mistress of the house, and her friends, seemed, he nearly wept, and tremble
d with fright: but he would rather have died than leave Nastasia Philipovna at s
uch a crisis, for he loved her as if she were his own granddaughter.
   Afanasy Ivanovitch greatly disliked having anything to do with the affair, bu
t he was too much interested to leave, in spite of the mad turn things had taken
; and a few words that had dropped from the lips of Nastasia puzzled him so much
, that he felt he could not go without an explanation. He resolved therefore, to
 see it out, and to adopt the attitude of silent spectator, as most suited to hi
s dignity. Genera Epanchin alone determined to depart. He was annoyed at the man
ner in which his gift had been returned, an though he had condescended, under th
e influence of passion, to place himself on a level with Ptitsin and Ferdishenko
, his self-respect and sense of duty now returned together with a consciousness 
of what was due to his social rank and official importance. In short, he plainly
 showed his conviction that a man in his position could have nothing to do with 
Rogojin and his companions. But Nastasia interrupted him at his first words.
   "Ah, general!" she cried, "I was forgetting! If I had only foreseen this unpl
easantness! I won't insist on keeping you against your will, although I should h
ave liked you to be beside me now. In any case, I am most grateful to you for yo
ur visit, and flattering attention but if you are afraid"
   "Excuse me, Nastasia Philipovna," interrupted the general, with chivalric gen
erosity. "To whom are you speaking? I have remained until now simply because of 
my devotion to you, and as for danger, I am only afraid that the carpets may be 
ruined, and the furniture smashed! You should shut the door on the lot, in my opi
nion.
   But I confess that I am extremely curious to see how it ends."
   "Rogojin!" announced Ferdishenko.
   "What do you think about it?" said the general in a low voice to Totski. "Is 
she mad? I mean mad in the medical sense of the word  eh?"
   "I've always said she was predisposed to it," whispered Afanasy Ivanovitch sl
yly. "Perhaps it is a fever!"
   Since their visit to Gania's home, Rogojin's followers had been increased by 
two new recruits-a dissolute old man, the hero of some ancient scandal, and a re
tired sub-lieutenant. A laughable story was told of the former. He possessed, it
 was said, a set of false teeth, and one day when he wanted money for a drinking
 orgy, he pawned them, and was never able to reclaim them! The officer appeared 
to be a rival of the gentleman who was so proud of his fists. He was known to no
ne of Rogojin's followers, but as they passed by the Nevsky, where he stood begg
ing, he had joined their ranks. His claim for the charity he desired seemed base
d on the fact that in the days of his prosperity he had given away as much as fi
fteen roubles at a time. The rivals seemed more than a little jealous of one ano
ther. The athlete appeared injured at the admission of the "beggar" into the com
pany. By nature taciturn, he now merely growled occasionally like a bear, and gl
ared contemptuously upon the "beggar," who, being somewhat of a man of the world
, and a diplomatist, tried to insinuate himself into the bear's good graces. He 
was a much smaller man than the athlete, and doubtless was conscious that he mus
t tread warily.
   Gently and without argument he alluded to the advantages of the English style
 in boxing, and showed himself a firm believer in Western institutions. The athl
ete's lips curled disdainfully, and without honouring his adversary with a forma
l denial, he exhibited, as if by accident, that peculiarly Russian object-an eno
rmous fist, clenched, muscular, and covered with red hairs!
   The sight of this pre-eminently national attribute was enough to convince any
body, without words, that it was a serious matter for those who should happen to
 come into contact with it.
   None of the band were very drunk, for the leader had kept his intended visit 
to Nastasia in view all day, and had done his best to prevent his followers from
 drinking too much. He was sober himself, but the excitement of this chaotic day
-the strangest day of his life-had affected him so that he was in a dazed, wild 
condition, which almost resembled drunkenness.
   He had kept but one idea before him all day, and for that he had worked in an
 agony of anxiety and a fever of suspense. His lieutenants had worked so hard fr
om five o'clock until eleven, that they actually had collected a hundred thousan
d roubles for him, but at such terrific expense, that the rate of interest was o
nly mentioned among them in whispers and with bated breath.
   As before, Rogojin walked in advance of his troop, who followed him with ming
led self-assertion and timidity. They were specially frightened of Nastasia Phil
ipovna herself, for some reason.
   Many of them expected to be thrown downstairs at once, without further ceremo
ny, the elegant arid irresistible Zaleshoff among them. But the party led by the
 athlete, without openly showing their hostile intentions, silently nursed conte
mpt and even hatred for Nastasia Philipovna, and marched into her house as they 
would have marched into an enemy's fortress. Arrived there, the luxury of the ro
oms seemed to inspire them with a kind of respect, not unmixed with alarm. So ma
ny things were entirely new to their experience-the choice furniture, the pictur
es, the great statue of Venus. They followed their chief into the salon, however
, with a kind of impudent curiosity. There, the sight of General Epanchin among 
the guests, caused many of them to beat a hasty retreat into the adjoining room,
 the "boxer" and "beggar" being among the first to go. A few only, of whom Lebed
eff made one, stood their ground; he had contrived to walk side by side with Rog
ojin, for he quite understood the importance of a man who had a fortune of a mil
lion odd roubles, and who at this moment carried a hundred thousand in his hand.
 It may be added that the whole company, not excepting Lebedeff, had the vaguest
 idea of the extent of their powers, and of how far they could safely go.
   At some moments Lebedeff was sure that right was on their side; at others he 
tried uneasily to remember various cheering and reassuring articles of the Civil
 Code.
   Rogojin, when he stepped into the room, and his eyes fell upon Nastasia, stop
ped short, grew white as a sheet, and stood staring; it was clear that his heart
 was beating painfully. So he stood, gazing intently, but timidly, for a few sec
onds. Suddenly, as though bereft of his senses, he moved forward, staggering hel
plessly, towards the table. On his way he collided against Ptitsin's chair, and 
put his dirty foot on the lace skirt of the silent lady's dress; but he neither 
apologized for this, nor even noticed it.
   On reaching the table, he placed upon it a strange-looking object, which he h
ad carried with him into the drawing-room. This was a paper packet, some six or 
seven inches thick, and eight or nine in length, wrapped in an old newspaper, an
d tied round three or four times with string.
   Having placed this before her, he stood with drooped arms and head, as though
 awaiting his sentence.
   His costume was the same as it had been in the morning, except for a new silk
 handkerchief round his neck, bright green and red, fastened with a huge diamond
 pin, and an enormous diamond ring on his dirty forefinger.
   Lebedeff stood two or three paces behind his chief; and the rest of the band 
waited about near the door.
   The two maid-servants were both peeping in, frightened and amazed at this unu
sual and disorderly scene.
   "What is that?" asked Nastasia Philipovna, gazing intently at Rogojin, and in
dicating the paper packet.
   "A hundred thousand," replied the latter, almost in a whisper.
   "Oh! so he kept his word-there's a man for you! Well, sit down, please-take t
hat chair. I shall have something to say to you presently. Who are all these wit
h you? The same party? Let them come in and sit down. There's room on that sofa,
 there are some chairs and there's another sofa! Well, why don't they sit down?"
   Sure enough, some of the brave fellows entirely lost their heads at this poin
t, and retreated into the next room. Others, however, took the hint and sat down
, as far as they could from the table, however; feeling braver in proportion to 
their distance from Nastasia.
   Rogojin took the chair offered him, but he did not sit long; he soon stood up
 again, and did not reseat himself. Little by little he began to look around him
 and discern the other guests. Seeing Gania, he smiled venomously and muttered t
o himself, "Look at that!"
   He gazed at Totski and the general with no apparent confusion, and with very 
little curiosity. But when he observed that the prince was seated beside Nastasi
a Philipovna, he could not take his eyes off him for a long while, and was clear
ly amazed. He could not account for the prince's presence there. It was not in t
he least surprising that Rogojin should be, at this time, in a more or less deli
rious condition; for not to speak of the excitements of the day, he had spent th
e night before in the train, and had not slept more than a wink for forty-eight 
hours.
   "This, gentlemen, is a hundred thousand roubles," said Nastasia Philipovna, a
ddressing the company in general, "here, in this dirty parcel. This afternoon Ro
gojin yelled, like a madman, that he would bring me a hundred thousand in the ev
ening, and I have been waiting for him all the while. He was bargaining for me, 
you know; first he offered me eighteen thousand; then he rose to forty, and then
 to a hundred thousand. And he has kept his word, see! My goodness, how white he
 is! All this happened this afternoon, at Gania's. I had gone to pay his mother 
a visit-my future family, you know! And his sister said to my very face, surely 
somebody will turn this shameless creature out. After which she spat in her brot
her Gania's face-a girl of character, that!"
   "Nastasia Philipovna!" began the general, reproachfully. He was beginning to 
put his own interpretation on the affair.
   "Well, what, general? Not quite good form, eh? Oh, nonsense! Here have I been
 sitting in my box at the French theatre for the last five years like a statue o
f inaccessible virtue, and kept out of the way of all admirers, like a silly lit
tle idiot! Now, there's this man, who comes and pays down his hundred thousand o
n the table, before you all, in spite of my five years of innocence and proud vi
rtue, and I dare be sworn he has his sledge outside waiting to carry me off. He 
values me at a hundred thousand! I see you are still angry with me, Gania! Why, 
surely you never really wished to take ME into your family? ME, Rogojin's mistre
ss! What did the prince say just now?"
   "I never said you were Rogojin's mistress-you are NOT!" said the prince, in t
rembling accents.
   "Nastasia Philipovna, dear soul!" cried the actress, impatiently,
   "do be calm, dear! If it annoys you so-all this-do go away and rest! Of cours
e you would never go with this wretched fellow, in spite of his hundred thousand
 roubles! Take his money and kick him out of the house; that's the way to treat 
him and the likes of him! Upon my word, if it were my business, I'd soon clear t
hem all out!"
   The actress was a kind-hearted woman, and highly impressionable.
   She was very angry now.
   "Don't be cross, Daria Alexeyevna!" laughed Nastasia. "I was not angry when I
 spoke; I wasn't reproaching Gania. I don't know how it was that I ever could ha
ve indulged the whim of entering an honest family like his. I saw his mother-and
 kissed her hand, too. I came and stirred up all that fuss, Gania, this afternoo
n, on purpose to see how much you could swallow-you surprised me, my friend-you 
did, indeed. Surely you could not marry a woman who accepts pearls like those yo
u knew the general was going to give me, on the very eve of her marriage? And Ro
gojin! Why, in your own house and before your own brother and sister, he bargain
ed with me! Yet you could come here and expect to be betrothed to me before you 
left the house! You almost brought your sister, too. Surely what Rogojin said ab
out you is not really true: that you would crawl all the way to the other end of
 the town, on hands and knees, for three roubles?"
   "Yes, he would!" said Rogojin, quietly, but with an air of absolute convictio
n.
   "H'm! and he receives a good salary, I'm told. Well, what should you get but 
disgrace and misery if you took a wife you hated into your family (for I know ve
ry well that you do hate me)? No, no! I believe now that a man like you would mu
rder anyone for money-sharpen a razor and come up behind his best friend and cut
 his throat like a sheep-I've read of such people. Everyone seems money-mad nowa
days. No, no! I may be shameless, but you are far worse. I don't say a word abou
t that other-"
   "Nastasia Philipovna, is this really you? You, once so refined and delicate o
f speech. Oh, what a tongue! What dreadful things you are saying," cried the gen
eral, wringing his hands in real grief.
   "I am intoxicated, general. I am having a day out, you know-it's my birthday!
 I have long looked forward to this happy occasion.
   Daria Alexeyevna, you see that nosegay-man, that Monsieur aux Camelias, sitti
ng there laughing at us?"
   "I am not laughing, Nastasia Philipovna; I am only listening with all my atte
ntion," said Totski, with dignity.
   "Well, why have I worried him, for five years, and never let him go free? Is 
he worth it? He is only just what he ought to be-nothing particular. He thinks I
 am to blame, too. He gave me my education, kept me like a countess. Money-my wo
rd! What a lot of money he spent over me! And he tried to find me an honest husb
and first, and then this Gania, here. And what do you think? All these five year
s I did not live with him, and yet I took his money, and considered I was quite 
justified.
   "You say, take the hundred thousand and kick that man out. It is true, it is 
an abominable business, as you say. I might have married long ago, not Gania-Oh,
 no!-but that would have been abominable too.
   "Would you believe it, I had some thoughts of marrying Totski, four years ago
! I meant mischief, I confess-but I could have had him, I give you my word; he a
sked me himself. But I thought, no! it's not worthwhile to take such advantage o
f him. No! I had better go on to the streets, or accept Rogojin, or become a was
herwoman or something-for I have nothing of my own, you know.
   I shall go away and leave everything behind, to the last rag-he shall have it
 all back. And who would take me without anything?
   Ask Gania, there, whether he would. Why, even Ferdishenko wouldn't have me!"
   "No, Ferdishenko would not; he is a candid fellow, Nastasia Philipovna," said
 that worthy. "But the prince would. You sit here making complaints, but just lo
ok at the prince. I've been observing him for a long while."
   Nastasia Philipovna looked keenly round at the prince.
   "Is that true?" she asked.
   "Quite true," whispered the prince.
   "You'll take me as I am, with nothing?"
   "I will, Nastasia Philipovna."
   "Here's a pretty business!" cried the general. "However, it might have been e
xpected of him."
   The prince continued to regard Nastasia with a sorrowful, but intent and pier
cing, gaze.
   "Here's another alternative for me," said Nastasia, turning once more to the 
actress; "and he does it out of pure kindness of heart. I know him. I've found a
 benefactor. Perhaps, though, what they say about him may be true-that he's an-w
e know what. And what shall you live on, if you are really so madly in love with
 Rogojin's mistress, that you are ready to marry her -eh?"
   "I take you as a good, honest woman, Nastasia Philipovna-not as Rogojin's mis
tress."
   "Who? I?-good and honest?"
   "Yes, you."
   "Oh, you get those ideas out of novels, you know. Times are changed now, dear
 prince; the world sees things as they really are. That's all nonsense. Besides,
 how can you marry? You need a nurse, not a wife."
   The prince rose and began to speak in a trembling, timid tone, but with the a
ir of a man absolutely sure of the truth of his words.
   "I know nothing, Nastasia Philipovna. I have seen nothing. You are right so f
ar; but I consider that you would be honouring me, and not I you. I am a nobody.
 You have suffered, you have passed through hell and emerged pure, and that is v
ery much. Why do you shame yourself by desiring to go with Rogojin? You are deli
rious.
   You have returned to Mr. Totski his seventy-five thousand roubles, and declar
ed that you will leave this house and all that is in it, which is a line of cond
uct that not one person here would imitate. Nastasia Philipovna, I love you! I w
ould die for you. I shall never let any man say one word against you, Nastasia P
hilipovna! and if we are poor, I can work for both."
   As the prince spoke these last words a titter was heard from Ferdishenko; Leb
edeff laughed too. The general grunted with irritation; Ptitsin and Totski barel
y restrained their smiles.
   The rest all sat listening, open-mouthed with wonder.
   "But perhaps we shall not be poor; we may be very rich, Nastasia Philipovna."
 continued the prince, in the same timid, quivering tones. "I don't know for cer
tain, and I'm sorry to say I haven't had an opportunity of finding out all day; 
but I received a letter from Moscow, while I was in Switzerland, from a Mr.
   Salaskin, and he acquaints me with the fact that I am entitled to a very larg
e inheritance. This letter-"
   The prince pulled a letter out of his pocket.
   "Is he raving?" said the general. "Are we really in a mad-house?"
   There was silence for a moment. Then Ptitsin spoke.
   "I think you said, prince, that your letter was from Salaskin?
   Salaskin is a very eminent man, indeed, in his own world; he is a wonderfully
 clever solicitor, and if he really tells you this, I think you may be pretty su
re that he is right. It so happens, luckily, that I know his handwriting, for I 
have lately had business with him. If you would allow me to see it, I should per
haps be able to tell you."
   The prince held out the letter silently, but with a shaking hand.
   "What, what?" said the general, much agitated.
   "What's all this? Is he really heir to anything?"
   All present concentrated their attention upon Ptitsin, reading the prince's l
etter. The general curiosity had received a new fillip. Ferdishenko could not si
t still. Rogojin fixed his eyes first on the prince, and then on Ptitsin, and th
en back again; he was extremely agitated. Lebedeff could not stand it. He crept 
up and read over Ptitsin's shoulder, with the air of a naughty boy who expects a
 box on the ear every moment for his indiscretion.
      XVI.
   "It's good business," said Ptitsin, at last, folding the letter and handing i
t back to the prince. "You will receive, without the slightest trouble, by the l
ast will and testament of your aunt, a very large sum of money indeed."
   "Impossible!" cried the general, starting up as if he had been shot.
   Ptitsin explained, for the benefit of the company, that the prince's aunt had
 died five months since. He had never known her, but she was his mother's own si
ster, the daughter of a Moscow merchant, one Paparchin, who had died a bankrupt.
 But the elder brother of this same Paparchin, had been an eminent and very rich
 merchant. A year since it had so happened that his only two sons had both died 
within the same month. This sad event had so affected the old man that he, too, 
had died very shortly after.
   He was a widower, and had no relations left, excepting the prince's aunt, a p
oor woman living on charity, who was herself at the point of death from dropsy; 
but who had time, before she died, to set Salaskin to work to find her nephew, a
nd to make her will bequeathing her newly-acquired fortune to him.
   It appeared that neither the prince, nor the doctor with whom he lived in Swi
tzerland, had thought of waiting for further communications; but the prince had 
started straight away with Salaskin's letter in his pocket.
   "One thing I may tell you, for certain," concluded Ptitsin, addressing the pr
ince, "that there is no question about the authenticity of this matter. Anything
 that Salaskin writes you as regards your unquestionable right to this inheritan
ce, you may look upon as so much money in your pocket. I congratulate you, princ
e; you may receive a million and a half of roubles, perhaps more; I don't know. 
All I DO know is that Paparchin was a very rich merchant indeed."
   "Hurrah!" cried Lebedeff, in a drunken voice. "Hurrah for the last of the Mui
shkins!"
   "My goodness me! and I gave him twenty-five roubles this morning as though he
 were a beggar," blurted out the general, half senseless with amazement. "Well, 
I congratulate you, I congratulate you!" And the general rose from his seat and 
solemnly embraced the prince. All came forward with congratulations; even those 
of Rogojin's party who had retreated into the next room, now crept softly back t
o look on. For the moment even Nastasia Philipovna was forgotten.
   But gradually the consciousness crept back into the minds of each one present
 that the prince had just made her an offer of marriage. The situation had, ther
efore, become three times as fantastic as before.
   Totski sat and shrugged his shoulders, bewildered. He was the only guest left
 sitting at this time; the others had thronged round the table in disorder, and 
were all talking at once.
   It was generally agreed, afterwards, in recalling that evening, that from thi
s moment Nastasia Philipovna seemed entirely to lose her senses. She continued t
o sit still in her place, looking around at her guests with a strange, bewildere
d expression, as though she were trying to collect her thoughts, and could not.
   Then she suddenly turned to the prince, and glared at him with frowning brows
; but this only lasted one moment. Perhaps it suddenly struck her that all this 
was a jest, but his face seemed to reassure her. She reflected, and smiled again
, vaguely.
   "So I am really a princess," she whispered to herself, ironically, and glanci
ng accidentally at Daria Alexeyevna's face, she burst out laughing.
   "Ha, ha, ha!" she cried, "this is an unexpected climax, after all. I didn't e
xpect this. What are you all standing up for, gentlemen? Sit down; congratulate 
me and the prince! Ferdishenko, just step out and order some more champagne, wil
l you? Katia, Pasha," she added suddenly, seeing the servants at the door,
   "come here! I'm going to be married, did you hear? To the prince.
   He has a million and a half of roubles; he is Prince Muishkin, and has asked 
me to marry him. Here, prince, come and sit by me; and here comes the wine. Now 
then, ladies and gentlemen, where are your congratulations?"
   "Hurrah!" cried a number of voices. A rush was made for the wine by Rogojin's
 followers, though, even among them, there seemed some sort of realization that 
the situation had changed. Rogojin stood and looked on, with an incredulous smil
e, screwing up one side of his mouth.
   "Prince, my dear fellow, do remember what you are about," said the general, a
pproaching Muishkin, and pulling him by the coat sleeve.
   Nastasia Philipovna overheard the remark, and burst out laughing.
   "No, no, general!" she cried. "You had better look out! I am the princess now
, you know. The prince won't let you insult me.
   Afanasy Ivanovitch, why don't you congratulate me? I shall be able to sit at 
table with your new wife, now. Aha! you see what I gain by marrying a prince! A 
million and a half, and a prince, and an idiot into the bargain, they say. What 
better could I wish for? Life is only just about to commence for me in earnest.
   Rogojin, you are a little too late. Away with your paper parcel!
   I'm going to marry the prince; I'm richer than you are now."
   But Rogojin understood how things were tending, at last. An inexpressibly pai
nful expression came over his face. He wrung his hands; a groan made its way up 
from the depths of his soul.
   "Surrender her, for God's sake!" he said to the prince.
   All around burst out laughing.
   "What? Surrender her to YOU?" cried Daria Alexeyevna. "To a fellow who comes 
and bargains for a wife like a moujik! The prince wishes to marry her, and you-"
   "So do I, so do I! This moment, if I could! I'd give every farthing I have to
 do it."
   "You drunken moujik," said Daria Alexeyevna, once more. "You ought to be kick
ed out of the place."
   The laughter became louder than ever.
   "Do you hear, prince?" said Nastasia Philipovna. "Do you hear how this moujik
 of a fellow goes on bargaining for your bride?"
   "He is drunk," said the prince, quietly, "and he loves you very much."
   "Won't you be ashamed, afterwards, to reflect that your wife very nearly ran 
away with Rogojin?"
   "Oh, you were raving, you were in a fever; you are still half delirious."
   "And won't you be ashamed when they tell you, afterwards, that your wife live
d at Totski's expense so many years?"
   "No; I shall not be ashamed of that. You did not so live by your own will."
   "And you'll never reproach me with it?"
   "Never."
   "Take care, don't commit yourself for a whole lifetime."
   "Nastasia Philipovna." said the prince, quietly, and with deep emotion, "I sa
id before that I shall esteem your consent to be my wife as a great honour to my
self, and shall consider that it is you who will honour me, not I you, by our ma
rriage. You laughed at these words, and others around us laughed as well; I hear
d them. Very likely I expressed myself funnily, and I may have looked funny, but
, for all that, I believe I understand where honour lies, and what I said was bu
t the literal truth. You were about to ruin yourself just now, irrevocably; you 
would never have forgiven yourself for so doing afterwards; and yet, you are abs
olutely blameless. It is impossible that your life should be altogether ruined a
t your age. What matter that Rogojin came bargaining here, and that Gavrila Arda
lionovitch would have deceived you if he could? Why do you continually remind us
 of these facts? I assure you once more that very few could find it in them to a
ct as you have acted this day. As for your wish to go with Rogojin, that was sim
ply the idea of a delirious and suffering brain. You are still quite feverish; y
ou ought to be in bed, not here. You know quite well that if you had gone with R
ogojin, you would have become a washer-woman next day, rather than stay with him
. You are proud, Nastasia Philipovna, and perhaps you have really suffered so mu
ch that you imagine yourself to be a desperately guilty woman. You require a gre
at deal of petting and looking after, Nastasia Philipovna, and I will do this. I
 saw your portrait this morning, and it seemed quite a familiar face to me; it s
eemed to me that the portraitface was calling to me for help. I-I shall respect 
you all my life, Nastasia Philipovna," concluded the prince, as though suddenly 
recollecting himself, and blushing to think of the sort of company before whom h
e had said all this.
   Ptitsin bowed his head and looked at the ground, overcome by a mixture of fee
lings. Totski muttered to himself: "He may be an idiot, but he knows that flatte
ry is the best road to success here."
   The prince observed Gania's eyes flashing at him, as though they would gladly
 annihilate him then and there.
   "That's a kind-hearted man, if you like," said Daria Alexeyevna, whose wrath 
was quickly evaporating.
   "A refined man, but-lost," murmured the general.
   Totski took his hat and rose to go. He and the general exchanged glances, mak
ing a private arrangement, thereby, to leave the house together.
   "Thank you, prince; no one has ever spoken to me like that before," began Nas
tasia Philipovna. "Men have always bargained for me, before this; and not a sing
le respectable man has ever proposed to marry me. Do you hear, Afanasy Ivanovitc
h? What do YOU think of what the prince has just been saying? It was almost immo
dest, wasn't it? You, Rogojin, wait a moment, don't go yet! I see you don't inte
nd to move however. Perhaps I may go with you yet. Where did you mean to take me
 to?"
   "To Ekaterinhof," replied Lebedeff. Rogojin simply stood staring, with trembl
ing lips, not daring to believe his ears. He was stunned, as though from a blow 
on the head.
   "What are you thinking of, my dear Nastasia?" said Daria Alexeyevna in alarm.
 "What are you saying?" "You are not going mad, are you?"
   Nastasia Philipovna burst out laughing and jumped up from the sofa.
   "You thought I should accept this good child's invitation to ruin him, did yo
u?" she cried. "That's Totski's way, not mine. He's fond of children. Come along
, Rogojin, get your money ready! We won't talk about marrying just at this momen
t, but let's see the money at all events. Come! I may not marry you, either. I d
on't know. I suppose you thought you'd keep the money, if I did! Ha, ha, ha! non
sense! I have no sense of shame left. I tell you I have been Totski's concubine.
 Prince, you must marry Aglaya Ivanovna, not Nastasia Philipovna, or this fellow
 Ferdishenko will always be pointing the finger of scorn at you. You aren't afra
id, I know; but I should always be afraid that I had ruined you, and that you wo
uld reproach me for it. As for what you say about my doing you honour by marryin
g you-well, Totski can tell you all about that. You had your eye on Aglaya, Gani
a, you know you had; and you might have married her if you had not come bargaini
ng. You are all like this. You should choose, once for all, between disreputable
 women, and respectable ones, or you are sure to get mixed. Look at the general,
 how he's staring at me!"
   "This is too horrible," said the general, starting to his feet.
   All were standing up now. Nastasia was absolutely beside herself.
   "I am very proud, in spite of what I am," she continued. "You called me 'perf
ection' just now, prince. A nice sort of perfection to throw up a prince and a m
illion and a half of roubles in order to be able to boast of the fact afterwards
! What sort of a wife should I make for you, after all I have said?
   Afanasy Ivanovitch, do you observe I have really and truly thrown away a mill
ion of roubles? And you thought that I should consider your wretched seventy-fiv
e thousand, with Gania thrown in for a husband, a paradise of bliss! Take your s
eventy-five thousand back, sir; you did not reach the hundred thousand. Rogojin 
cut a better dash than you did. I'll console Gania myself; I have an idea about 
that. But now I must be off! I've been in prison for ten years. I'm free at last
! Well, Rogojin, what are you waiting for? Let's get ready and go."
   "Come along!" shouted Rogojin, beside himself with joy. "Hey! all of you fell
ows! Wine! Round with it! Fill the glasses!"
   "Get away!" he shouted frantically, observing that Daria Alexeyevna was appro
aching to protest against Nastasia's conduct.
   "Get away, she's mine, everything's mine! She's a queen, get away!"
   He was panting with ecstasy. He walked round and round Nastasia Philipovna an
d told everybody to "keep their distance."
   All the Rogojin company were now collected in the drawing-room; some were dri
nking, some laughed and talked: all were in the highest and wildest spirits. Fer
dishenko was doing his best to unite himself to them; the general and Totski aga
in made an attempt to go. Gania, too stood hat in hand ready to go; but seemed t
o be unable to tear his eyes away from the scene before him "Get out, keep your 
distance!" shouted Rogojin.
   "What are you shouting about there!" cried Nastasia "I'm not yours yet. I may
 kick you out for all you know I haven't taken your money yet; there it all is o
n the table Here, give me over that packet! Is there a hundred thousand roubles 
in that one packet? Pfu! what abominable stuff it looks! Oh! nonsense, Daria Ale
xeyevna; you surely did not expect me to ruin HIM?" (indicating the prince). "Fa
ncy him nursing me! Why, he needs a nurse himself! The general, there, will be h
is nurse now, you'll see. Here, prince, look here! Your bride is accepting money
. What a disreputable woman she must be! And you wished to marry her!
   What are you crying about? Is it a bitter dose? Never mind, you shall laugh y
et. Trust to time." (In spite of these words there were two large tears rolling 
down Nastasia's own cheeks.) "It's far better to think twice of it now than afte
rwards. Oh! you mustn't cry like that! There's Katia crying, too. What is it, Ka
tia, dear? I shall leave you and Pasha a lot of things, I've laid them out for y
ou already; but good-bye, now. I made an honest girl like you serve a low woman 
like myself. It's better so, prince, it is indeed. You'd begin to despise me aft
erwards-we should never be happy. Oh! you needn't swear, prince, I shan't believ
e you, you know. How foolish it would be, too! No, no; we'd better say good-bye 
and part friends. I am a bit of a dreamer myself, and I used to dream of you onc
e. Very often during those five years down at his estate I used to dream and thi
nk, and I always imagined just such a good, honest, foolish fellow as you, one w
ho should come and say to me: 'You are an innocent woman, Nastasia Philipovna, a
nd I adore you.' I dreamt of you often. I used to think so much down there that 
I nearly went mad; and then this fellow here would come down. He would stay a co
uple of months out of the twelve, and disgrace and insult and deprave me, and th
en go; so that I longed to drown myself in the pond a thousand times over; but I
 did not dare do it. I hadn't the heart, and now-well, are you ready, Rogojin?"
   "Ready-keep your distance, all of you!"
   "We're all ready," said several of his friends. "The troikas
   [Sledges drawn by three horses abreast.] are at the door, bells and all."
   Nastasia Philipovna seized the packet of bank-notes.
   "Gania, I have an idea. I wish to recompense you-why should you lose all? Rog
ojin, would he crawl for three roubles as far as the Vassiliostrof?
   "Oh, wouldn't he just!"
   "Well, look here, Gania. I wish to look into your heart once more, for the la
st time. You've worried me for the last three months-now it's my turn. Do you se
e this packet? It contains a hundred thousand roubles. Now, I'm going to throw i
t into the fire, here-before all these witnesses. As soon as the fire catches ho
ld of it, you put your hands into the fire and pick it out-without gloves, you k
now. You must have bare hands, and you must turn your sleeves up. Pull it out, I
 say, and it's all yours. You may burn your fingers a little, of course; but the
n it's a hundred thousand roubles, remember-it won't take you long to lay hold o
f it and snatch it out. I shall so much admire you if you put your hands into th
e fire for my money. All here present may be witnesses that the whole packet of 
money is yours if you get it out. If you don't get it out, it shall burn. I will
 let no one else come; away-get away, all of you-it's my money!
   Rogojin has bought me with it. Is it my money, Rogojin?"
   "Yes, my queen; it's your own money, my joy."
   "Get away then, all of you. I shall do as I like with my own-don't meddle! Fe
rdishenko, make up the fire, quick!"
   "Nastasia Philipovna, I can't; my hands won't obey me," said Ferdishenko, ast
ounded and helpless with bewilderment.
   "Nonsense," cried Nastasia Philipovna, seizing the poker and raking a couple 
of logs together. No sooner did a tongue of flame burst out than she threw the p
acket of notes upon it.
   Everyone gasped; some even crossed themselves.
   "She's mad-she's mad!" was the cry.
   "Oughtn't-oughtn't we to secure her?" asked the general of Ptitsin, in a whis
per; "or shall we send for the authorities?
   Why, she's mad, isn't she-isn't she, eh?"
   "N-no, I hardly think she is actually mad," whispered Ptitsin, who was as whi
te as his handkerchief, and trembling like a leaf.
   He could not take his eyes off the smouldering packet.
   "She's mad surely, isn't she?" the general appealed to Totski.
   "I told you she wasn't an ordinary woman," replied the latter, who was as pal
e as anyone.
   "Oh, but, positively, you know-a hundred thousand roubles!"
   "Goodness gracious! good heavens!" came from all quarters of the room.
   All now crowded round the fire and thronged to see what was going on; everyon
e lamented and gave vent to exclamations of horror and woe. Some jumped up on ch
airs in order to get a better view.
   Daria Alexeyevna ran into the next room and whispered excitedly to Katia and 
Pasha. The beautiful German disappeared altogether.
   "My lady! my sovereign!" lamented Lebedeff, falling on his knees before Nasta
sia Philipovna, and stretching out his hands towards the fire; "it's a hundred t
housand roubles, it is indeed, I packed it up myself, I saw the money! My queen,
 let me get into the fire after it-say the word-I'll put my whole grey head into
 the fire for it! I have a poor lame wife and thirteen children.
   My father died of starvation last week. Nastasia Philipovna, Nastasia Philipo
vna!" The wretched little man wept, and groaned, and crawled towards the fire.
   "Away, out of the way!" cried Nastasia. "Make room, all of you!
   Gania, what are you standing there for? Don't stand on ceremony.
   Put in your hand! There's your whole happiness smouldering away, look! Quick!
"
   But Gania had borne too much that day, and especially this evening, and he wa
s not prepared for this last, quite unexpected trial.
   The crowd parted on each side of him and he was left face to face with Nastas
ia Philipovna, three paces from her. She stood by the fire and waited, with her 
intent gaze fixed upon him.
   Gania stood before her, in his evening clothes, holding his white gloves and 
hat in his hand, speechless and motionless, with arms folded and eyes fixed on t
he fire.
   A silly, meaningless smile played on his white, death-like lips.
   He could not take his eyes off the smouldering packet; but it appeared that s
omething new had come to birth in his soul-as though he were vowing to himself t
hat he would bear this trial.
   He did not move from his place. In a few seconds it became evident to all tha
t he did not intend to rescue the money.
   "Hey! look at it, it'll burn in another minute or two!" cried Nastasia Philip
ovna. "You'll hang yourself afterwards, you know, if it does! I'm not joking."
   The fire, choked between a couple of smouldering pieces of wood, had died dow
n for the first few moments after the packet was thrown upon it. But a little to
ngue of fire now began to lick the paper from below, and soon, gathering courage
, mounted the sides of the parcel, and crept around it. In another moment, the w
hole of it burst into flames, and the exclamations of woe and horror were redoub
led.
   "Nastasia Philipovna!" lamented Lebedeff again, straining towards the firepla
ce; but Rogojin dragged him away, and pushed him to the rear once more.
   The whole of Regojin's being was concentrated in one rapturous gaze of ecstas
y. He could not take his eyes off Nastasia. He stood drinking her in, as it were
. He was in the seventh heaven of delight.
   "Oh, what a queen she is!" he ejaculated, every other minute, throwing out th
e remark for anyone who liked to catch it. "That's the sort of woman for me! Whi
ch of you would think of doing a thing like that, you blackguards, eh?" he yelle
d. He was hopelessly and wildly beside himself with ecstasy.
   The prince watched the whole scene, silent and dejected.
   "I'll pull it out with my teeth for one thousand," said Ferdishenko.
   "So would I," said another, from behind, "with pleasure. Devil take the thing
!" he added, in a tempest of despair, "it will all be burnt up in a minute-It's 
burning, it's burning!"
   "It's burning, it's burning!" cried all, thronging nearer and nearer to the f
ire in their excitement.
   "Gania, don't be a fool! I tell you for the last time."
   "Get on, quick!" shrieked Ferdishenko, rushing wildly up to Gania, and trying
 to drag him to the fire by the sleeve of his coat. "Get it, you dummy, it's bur
ning away fast! Oh-DAMN the thing!"
   Gania hurled Ferdishenko from him; then he turned sharp round and made for th
e door. But he had not gone a couple of steps when he tottered and fell to the g
round.
   "He's fainted!" the cry went round.
   "And the money's burning still," Lebedeff lamented.
   "Burning for nothing," shouted others.
   "Katia-Pasha! Bring him some water!" cried Nastasia Philipovna.
   Then she took the tongs and fished out the packet.
   Nearly the whole of the outer covering was burned away, but it was soon evide
nt that the contents were hardly touched. The packet had been wrapped in a three
fold covering of newspaper, and the, notes were safe. All breathed more freely.
   "Some dirty little thousand or so may be touched," said Lebedeff, immensely r
elieved, "but there's very little harm done, after all."
   "It's all his-the whole packet is for him, do you hear-all of you?" cried Nas
tasia Philipovna, placing the packet by the side of Gania. "He restrained himsel
f, and didn't go after it; so his self-respect is greater than his thirst for mo
ney. All right-he'll come to directly-he must have the packet or he'll cut his t
hroat afterwards. There! He's coming to himself. General, Totski, all of you, di
d you hear me? The money is all Gania's. I give it to him, fully conscious of my
 action, as recompense for-well, for anything he thinks best. Tell him so. Let i
t lie here beside him. Off we go, Rogojin! Goodbye, prince. I have seen a man fo
r the first time in my life. Goodbye, Afanasy Ivanovitch-and thanks!"
   The Rogojin gang followed their leader and Nastasia Philipovna to the entranc
e-hall, laughing and shouting and whistling.
   In the hall the servants were waiting, and handed her her fur cloak. Martha, 
the cook, ran in from the kitchen. Nastasia kissed them all round.
   "Are you really throwing us all over, little mother? Where, where are you goi
ng to? And on your birthday, too!" cried the four girls, crying over her and kis
sing her hands.
   "I am going out into the world, Katia; perhaps I shall be a laundress. I don'
t know. No more of Afanasy Ivanovitch, anyhow.
   Give him my respects. Don't think badly of me, girls."
   The prince hurried down to the front gate where the party were settling into 
the troikas, all the bells tinkling a merry accompaniment the while. The general
 caught him up on the stairs:
   "Prince, prince!" he cried, seizing hold of his arm, "recollect yourself! Dro
p her, prince! You see what sort of a woman she is.
   I am speaking to you like a father."
   The prince glanced at him, but said nothing. He shook himself free, and rushe
d on downstairs.
   The general was just in time to see the prince take the first sledge he could
 get, and, giving the order to Ekaterinhof, start off in pursuit of the troikas.
 Then the general's fine grey horse dragged that worthy home, with some new thou
ghts, and some new hopes and calculations developing in his brain, and with the 
pearls in his pocket, for he had not forgotten to bring them along with him, bei
ng a man of business. Amid his new thoughts and ideas there came, once or twice,
 the image of Nastasia Philipovna. The general sighed.
   "I'm sorry, really sorry," he muttered. "She's a ruined woman.
   Mad! mad! However, the prince is not for Nastasia Philipovna now,-perhaps it'
s as well."
   Two more of Nastasia's guests, who walked a short distance together, indulged
 in high moral sentiments of a similar nature.
   "Do you know, Totski, this is all very like what they say goes on among the J
apanese?" said Ptitsin. "The offended party there, they say, marches off to his 
insulter and says to him, 'You insulted me, so I have come to rip myself open be
fore your eyes;' and with these words he does actually rip his stomach open befo
re his enemy, and considers, doubtless, that he is having all possible and neces
sary satisfaction and revenge. There are strange characters in the world, sir!"
   "H'm! and you think there was something of this sort here, do you? Dear me-a 
very remarkable comparison, you know! But you must have observed, my dear Ptitsi
n, that I did all I possibly could. I could do no more than I did. And you must 
admit that there are some rare qualities in this woman. I felt I could not speak
 in that Bedlam, or I should have been tempted to cry out, when she reproached m
e, that she herself was my best justification. Such a woman could make anyone fo
rget all reason-everything! Even that moujik, Rogojin, you saw, brought her a hu
ndred thousand roubles! Of course, all that happened tonight was ephemeral, fant
astic, unseemly-yet it lacked neither colour nor originality. My God! What might
 not have been made of such a character combined with such beauty! Yet in spite 
of all efforts -in spite of all education, even-all those gifts are wasted! She 
is an uncut diamond I have often said so."
   And Afanasy Ivanovitch heaved a deep sigh.
      PART II
      I.
   Two days after the strange conclusion to Nastasia Philipovna's birthday party
, with the record of which we concluded the first part of this story, Prince Mui
shkin hurriedly left St. Petersburg for Moscow, in order to see after some busin
ess connected with the receipt of his unexpected fortune.
   It was said that there were other reasons for his hurried departure; but as t
o this, and as to his movements in Moscow, and as to his prolonged absence from 
St. Petersburg, we are able to give very little information.
   The prince was away for six months, and even those who were most interested i
n his destiny were able to pick up very little news about him all that while. Tr
ue, certain rumours did reach his friends, but these were both strange and rare,
 and each one contradicted the last.
   Of course the Epanchin family was much interested in his movements, though he
 had not had time to bid them farewell before his departure. The general, howeve
r, had had an opportunity of seeing him once or twice since the eventful evening
, and had spoken very seriously with him; but though he had seen the prince, as 
I say, he told his family nothing about the circumstance. In fact, for a month o
r so after his departure it was considered not the thing to mention the prince's
 name in the Epanchin household. Only Mrs. Epanchin, at the commencement of this
 period, had announced that she had been "cruelly mistaken in the prince!" and a
 day or two after, she had added, evidently alluding to him, but not mentioning 
his name, that it was an unalterable characteristic of hers to be mistaken in pe
ople. Then once more, ten days later, after some passage of arms with one of her
 daughters, she had remarked sententiously. "We have had enough of mistakes. I s
hall be more careful in future!" However, it was impossible to avoid remarking t
hat there was some sense of oppression in the household-something unspoken, but 
felt; something strained. All the members of the family wore frowning looks. The
 general was unusually busy; his family hardly ever saw him.
   As to the girls, nothing was said openly, at all events; and probably very li
ttle in private. They were proud damsels, and were not always perfectly confiden
tial even among themselves. But they understood each other thoroughly at the fir
st word on all occasions; very often at the first glance, so that there was no n
eed of much talking as a rule.
   One fact, at least, would have been perfectly plain to an outsider, had any s
uch person been on the spot; and that was, that the prince had made a very consi
derable impression upon the family, in spite of the fact that he had but once be
en inside the house, and then only for a short time. Of course, if analyzed, thi
s impression might have proved to be nothing more than a feeling of curiosity; b
ut be it what it might, there it undoubtedly was.
   Little by little, the rumours spread about town became lost in a maze of unce
rtainty. It was said that some foolish young prince, name unknown, had suddenly 
come into possession of a gigantic fortune, and had married a French ballet danc
er. This was contradicted, and the rumour circulated that it was a young merchan
t who had come into the enormous fortune and married the great ballet dancer, an
d that at the wedding the drunken young fool had burned seventy thousand roubles
 at a candle out of pure bravado.
   However, all these rumours soon died down, to which circumstance certain fact
s largely contributed. For instance, the whole of the Rogojin troop had departed
, with him at their head, for Moscow.
   This was exactly a week after a dreadful orgy at the Ekaterinhof gardens, whe
re Nastasia Philipovna had been present. It became known that after this orgy Na
stasia Philipovna had entirely disappeared, and that she had since been traced t
o Moscow; so that the exodus of the Rogojin band was found consistent with this 
report.
   There were rumours current as to Gania, too; but circumstances soon contradic
ted these. He had fallen seriously ill, and his illness precluded his appearance
 in society, and even at business, for over a month. As soon as he had recovered
, however, he threw up his situation in the public company under General Epanchi
n's direction, for some unknown reason, and the post was given to another. He ne
ver went near the Epanchins' house at all, and was exceedingly irritable and dep
ressed.
   Varvara Ardalionovna married Ptitsin this winter, and it was said that the fa
ct of Gania's retirement from business was the ultimate cause of the marriage, s
ince Gania was now not only unable to support his family, but even required help
 himself.
   We may mention that Gania was no longer mentioned in the Epanchin household a
ny more than the prince was; but that a certain circumstance in connection with 
the fatal evening at Nastasia's house became known to the general, and, in fact,
 to all the family the very next day. This fact was that Gania had come home tha
t night, but had refused to go to bed. He had awaited the prince's return from E
katerinhof with feverish impatience.
   On the latter's arrival, at six in the morning, Gania had gone to him in his 
room, bringing with him the singed packet of money, which he had insisted that t
he prince should return to Nastasia Philipovna without delay. It was said that w
hen Gania entered the prince's room, he came with anything but friendly feelings
, and in a condition of despair and misery; but that after a short conversation,
 he had stayed on for a couple of hours with him, sobbing continuously and bitte
rly the whole time. They had parted upon terms of cordial friendship.
   The Epanchins heard about this, as well as about the episode at Nastasia Phil
ipovna's. It was strange, perhaps, that the facts should become so quickly, and 
fairly accurately, known. As far as Gania was concerned, it might have been supp
osed that the news had come through Varvara Ardalionovna, who had suddenly becom
e a frequent visitor of the Epanchin girls, greatly to their mother's surprise. 
But though Varvara had seen fit, for some reason, to make friends with them, it 
was not likely that she would have talked to them about her brother. She had ple
nty of pride, in spite of the fact that in thus acting she was seeking intimacy 
with people who had practically shown her brother the door. She and the Epanchin
 girls had been acquainted in childhood, although of late they had met but rarel
y. Even now Varvara hardly ever appeared in the drawing-room, but would slip in 
by a back way.
   Lizabetha Prokofievna, who disliked Varvara, although she had a great respect
 for her mother, was much annoyed by this sudden intimacy, and put it down to th
e general "contrariness" of her daughters, who were "always on the lookout for s
ome new way of opposing her." Nevertheless, Varvara continued her visits.
   A month after Muishkin's departure, Mrs. Epanchin received a letter from her 
old friend Princess Bielokonski (who had lately left for Moscow), which letter p
ut her into the greatest good humour. She did not divulge its contents either to
 her daughters or the general, but her conduct towards the former became affecti
onate in the extreme. She even made some sort of confession to them, but they we
re unable to understand what it was about. She actually relaxed towards the gene
ral a little-he had been long disgraced-and though she managed to quarrel with t
hem all the next day, yet she soon came round, and from her general behaviour it
 was to be concluded that she had bad good news of some sort, which she would li
ke, but could not make up her mind, to disclose.
   However, a week later she received another letter from the same source, and a
t last resolved to speak.
   She solemnly announced that she had heard from old Princess Bielokonski, who 
had given her most comforting news about "that queer young prince." Her friend h
ad hunted him up, and found that all was going well with him. He had since calle
d in person upon her, making an extremely favourable impression, for the princes
s had received him each day since, and had introduced him into several good hous
es.
   The girls could see that their mother concealed a great deal from them, and l
eft out large pieces of the letter in reading it to them.
   However, the ice was broken, and it suddenly became possible to mention the p
rince's name again. And again it became evident how very strong was the impressi
on the young man had made in the household by his one visit there. Mrs. Epanchin
 was surprised at the effect which the news from Moscow had upon the girls, and 
they were no less surprised that after solemnly remarking that her most striking
 characteristic was "being mistaken in people" she should have troubled to obtai
n for the prince the favour and protection of so powerful an old lady as the Pri
ncess Bielokonski. As soon as the ice was thus broken, the general lost no time 
in showing that he, too, took the greatest interest in the subject. He admitted 
that he was interested, but said that it was merely in the business side of the 
question. It appeared that, in the interests of the prince, he had made arrangem
ents in Moscow for a careful watch to be kept upon the prince's business affairs
, and especially upon Salaskin. All that had been said as to the prince being an
 undoubted heir to a fortune turned out to be perfectly true; but the fortune pr
oved to be much smaller than was at first reported. The estate was considerably 
encumbered with debts; creditors turned up on all sides, and the prince, in spit
e of all advice and entreaty, insisted upon managing all matters of claim himsel
f-which, of course, meant satisfying everybody all round, although half the clai
ms were absolutely fraudulent.
   Mrs. Epanchin confirmed all this. She said the princess had written to much t
he same effect, and added that there was no curing a fool. But it was plain, fro
m her expression of face, how strongly she approved of this particular young foo
l's doings. In conclusion, the general observed that his wife took as great an i
nterest in the prince as though he were her own son; and that she had commenced 
to be especially affectionate towards Aglaya was a self-evident fact.
   All this caused the general to look grave and important. But, alas! this agre
eable state of affairs very soon changed once more.
   A couple of weeks went by, and suddenly the general and his wife were once mo
re gloomy and silent, and the ice was as firm as ever. The fact was, the general
, who had heard first, how Nastasia Philipovna had fled to Moscow and had been d
iscovered there by Rogojin; that she had then disappeared once more, and been fo
und again by Rogojin, and how after that she had almost promised to marry him, n
ow received news that she had once more disappeared, almost on the very day fixe
d for her wedding, flying somewhere into the interior of Russia this time, and t
hat Prince Muishkin had left all his affairs in the hands of Salaskin and disapp
eared also-but whether he was with Nastasia, or had only set off in search of he
r, was unknown.
   Lizabetha Prokofievna received confirmatory news from the princess-and alas, 
two months after the prince's first departure from St. Petersburg, darkness and 
mystery once more enveloped his whereabouts and actions, and in the Epanchin fam
ily the ice of silence once more formed over the subject. Varia, however, inform
ed the girls of what had happened, she having received the news from Ptitsin, wh
o generally knew more than most people.
   To make an end, we may say that there were many changes in the Epanchin house
hold in the spring, so that it was not difficult to forget the prince, who sent 
no news of himself.
   The Epanchin family had at last made up their minds to spend the summer abroa
d, all except the general, who could not waste time in "travelling for enjoyment
," of course. This arrangement was brought about by the persistence of the girls
, who insisted that they were never allowed to go abroad because their parents w
ere too anxious to marry them off. Perhaps their parents had at last come to the
 conclusion that husbands might be found abroad, and that a summer's travel migh
t bear fruit. The marriage between Alexandra and Totski had been broken off. Sin
ce the prince's departure from St. Petersburg no more had been said about it; th
e subject had been dropped without ceremony, much to the joy of Mrs. General, wh
o, announced that she was "ready to cross herself with both hands" in gratitude 
for the escape. The general, however, regretted Totski for a long while. "Such a
 fortune!" he sighed, "and such a good, easy-going fellow!"
   After a time it became known that Totski had married a French marquise, and w
as to be carried off by her to Paris, and then to Brittany.
   "Oh, well," thought the general, "he's lost to us for good, now."
   So the Epanchins prepared to depart for the summer.
   But now another circumstance occurred, which changed all the plans once more,
 and again the intended journey was put off, much to the delight of the general 
and his spouse.
   A certain Prince S- arrived in St. Petersburg from Moscow, an eminent and hon
ourable young man. He was one of those active persons who always find some good 
work with which to employ themselves. Without forcing himself upon the public no
tice, modest and unobtrusive, this young prince was concerned with much that hap
pened in the world in general.
   He had served, at first, in one of the civil departments, had then attended t
o matters connected with the local government of provincial towns, and had of la
te been a corresponding member of several important scientific societies. He was
 a man of excellent family and solid means, about thirty-five years of age.
   Prince S- made the acquaintance of the general's family, and Adelaida, the se
cond girl, made a great impression upon him.
   Towards the spring he proposed to her, and she accepted him. The general and 
his wife were delighted. The journey abroad was put off, and the wedding was fix
ed for a day not very distant.
   The trip abroad might have been enjoyed later on by Mrs. Epanchin and her two
 remaining daughters, but for another circumstance.
   It so happened that Prince S- introduced a distant relation of his own into t
he Epanchin family-one Evgenie Pavlovitch, a young officer of about twenty-eight
 years of age, whose conquests among the ladies in Moscow had been proverbial. T
his young gentleman no sooner set eyes on Aglaya than he became a frequent visit
or at the house. He was witty, well-educated, and extremely wealthy, as the gene
ral very soon discovered. His past reputation was the only thing against him.
   Nothing was said; there were not even any hints dropped; but still, it seemed
 better to the parents to say nothing more about going abroad this season, at al
l events. Aglaya herself perhaps was of a different opinion.
   All this happened just before the second appearance of our hero upon the scen
e.
   By this time, to judge from appearances, poor Prince Muishkin had been quite 
forgotten in St. Petersburg. If he had appeared suddenly among his acquaintances
, he would have been received as one from the skies; but we must just glance at 
one more fact before we conclude this preface.
   Colia Ivolgin, for some time after the prince's departure, continued his old 
life. That is, he went to school, looked after his father, helped Varia in the h
ouse, and ran her errands, and went frequently to see his friend, Hippolyte.
   The lodgers had disappeared very quickly-Ferdishenko soon after the events at
 Nastasia Philipovna's, while the prince went to Moscow, as we know. Gania and h
is mother went to live with Varia and Ptitsin immediately after the latter's wed
ding, while the general was housed in a debtor's prison by reason of certain IOU
's given to the captain's widow under the impression that they would never be fo
rmally used against him. This unkind action much surprised poor Ardalion Alexand
rovitch, the victim, as he called himself, of an "unbounded trust in the nobilit
y of the human heart."
   When he signed those notes of hand,he never dreamt that they would be a sourc
e of future trouble. The event showed that he was mistaken.
   "Trust in anyone after this! Have the least confidence in man or woman!" he c
ried in bitter tones, as he sat with his new friends in prison, and recounted to
 them his favourite stories of the siege of Kars, and the resuscitated soldier. 
On the whole, he accommodated himself very well to his new position. Ptitsin and
 Varia declared that he was in the right place, and Gania was of the same opinio
n. The only person who deplored his fate was poor Nina Alexandrovna, who wept bi
tter tears over him, to the great surprise of her household, and, though always 
in feeble health, made a point of going to see him as often as possible.
   Since the general's "mishap," as Colia called it, and the marriage of his sis
ter, the boy had quietly possessed himself of far more freedom. His relations sa
w little of him, for he rarely slept at home. He made many new friends; and was 
moreover, a frequent visitor at the debtor's prison, to which he invariably acco
mpanied his mother. Varia, who used to be always correcting him, never spoke to 
him now on the subject of his frequent absences, and the whole household was sur
prised to see Gania, in spite of his depression, on quite friendly terms with hi
s brother. This was something new, for Gania had been wont to look upon Colia as
 a kind of errand-boy, treating him with contempt, threatening to "pull his ears
," and in general driving him almost wild with irritation. It seemed now that Ga
nia really needed his brother, and the latter, for his part, felt as if he could
 forgive Gania much since he had returned the hundred thousand roubles offered t
o him by Nastasia Philipovna. Three months after the departure of the prince, th
e Ivolgin family discovered that Colia had made acquaintance with the Epanchins,
 and was on very friendly terms with the daughters. Varia heard of it first, tho
ugh Colia had not asked her to introduce him. Little by little the family grew q
uite fond of him. Madame Epanchin at first looked on him with disdain, and recei
ved him coldly, but in a short time he grew to please her, because, as she said,
 he "was candid and no flatterer" - a very true description. From the first he p
ut himself on an equality with his new friends, and though he sometimes read new
spapers and books to the mistress of the house, it was simply because he liked t
o be useful.
   One day, however, he and Lizabetha Prokofievna quarrelled seriously about the
 "woman question," in the course of a lively discussion on that burning subject.
 He told her that she was a tyrant, and that he would never set foot in her hous
e again. It may seem incredible, but a day or two after, Madame Epanchin sent a 
servant with a note begging him to return, and Colia, without standing on his di
gnity, did so at once.
   Aglaya was the only one of the family whose good graces he could not gain, an
d who always spoke to him haughtily, but it so happened that the boy one day suc
ceeded in giving the proud maiden a surprise.
   It was about Easter, when, taking advantage of a momentary tetea-tete Colia h
anded Aglaya a letter, remarking that he "had orders to deliver it to her privat
ely." She stared at him in amazement, but he did not wait to hear what she had t
o say, and went out. Aglaya broke the seal, and read as follows:
   "Once you did me the honour of giving me your confidence. Perhaps you have qu
ite forgotten me now! How is it that I am writing to you? I do not know; but I a
m conscious of an irresistible desire to remind you of my existence, especially 
you. How many times I have needed all three of you; but only you have dwelt alwa
ys in my mind's eye. I need you-I need you very much. I will not write about mys
elf. I have nothing to tell you. But I long for you to be happy. ARE you happy? 
That is all I wished to say to you-Your brother,
              "PR. L. MUISHKIN."
   On reading this short and disconnected note, Aglaya suddenly blushed all over
, and became very thoughtful.
   It would be difficult to describe her thoughts at that moment.
   One of them was, "Shall I show it to anyone?" But she was ashamed to show it.
 So she ended by hiding it in her table drawer, with a very strange, ironical sm
ile upon her lips.
   Next day, she took it out, and put it into a large book, as she usually did w
ith papers which she wanted to be able to find easily. She laughed when, about a
 week later, she happened to notice the name of the book, and saw that it was Do
n Quixote, but it would be difficult to say exactly why.
   I cannot say, either, whether she showed the letter to her sisters.
   But when she had read it herself once more, it suddenly struck her that surel
y that conceited boy, Colia, had not been the one chosen correspondent of the pr
ince all this while. She determined to ask him, and did so with an exaggerated s
how of carelessness.
   He informed her haughtily that though he had given the prince his permanent a
ddress when the latter left town, and had offered his services, the prince had n
ever before given him any commission to perform, nor had he written until the fo
llowing lines arrived, with Aglaya's letter. Aglaya took the note, and read it.
   "DEAR COLIA,-Please be so kind as to give the enclosed sealed letter to Aglay
a Ivanovna. Keep well-Ever your loving, "PR. L. MUISHKIN."
   "It seems absurd to trust a little pepper-box like you," said Aglaya, as she 
returned the note, and walked past the "pepperbox" with an expression of great c
ontempt.
   This was more than Colia could bear. He had actually borrowed Gania's new gre
en tie for the occasion, without saying why he wanted it, in order to impress he
r. He was very deeply mortified.
   II.
   IT was the beginning of June, and for a whole week the weather in St. Petersb
urg had been magnificent. The Epanchins had a luxurious country-house at Pavlofs
k, [One of the fashionable summer resorts near St. Petersburg.] and to this spot
 Mrs.
   Epanchin determined to proceed without further delay. In a couple of days all
 was ready, and the family had left town. A day or two after this removal to Pav
lofsk, Prince Muishkin arrived in St.
   Petersburg by the morning train from Moscow. No one met him; but, as he stepp
ed out of the carriage, he suddenly became aware of two strangely glowing eyes f
ixed upon him from among the crowd that met the train. On endeavouring to re-dis
cover the eyes, and see to whom they belonged, he could find nothing to guide hi
m. It must have been a hallucination. But the disagreeable impression remained, 
and without this, the prince was sad and thoughtful already, and seemed to be mu
ch preoccupied.
   His cab took him to a small and bad hotel near the Litaynaya.
   Here he engaged a couple of rooms, dark and badly furnished. He washed and ch
anged, and hurriedly left the hotel again, as though anxious to waste no time. A
nyone who now saw him for the first time since he left Petersburg would judge th
at he had improved vastly so far as his exterior was concerned. His clothes cert
ainly were very different; they were more fashionable, perhaps even too much so,
 and anyone inclined to mockery might have found something to smile at in his ap
pearance. But what is there that people will not smile at?
   The prince took a cab and drove to a street near the Nativity, where he soon 
discovered the house he was seeking. It was a small wooden villa, and he was str
uck by its attractive and clean appearance; it stood in a pleasant little garden
, full of flowers. The windows looking on the street were open, and the sound of
 a voice, reading aloud or making a speech, came through them. It rose at times 
to a shout, and was interrupted occasionally by bursts of laughter.
   Prince Muishkin entered the court-yard, and ascended the steps. A cook with h
er sleeves turned up to the elbows opened the door.
   The visitor asked if Mr. Lebedeff were at home.
   "He is in there," said she, pointing to the salon.
   The room had a blue wall-paper, and was well, almost pretentiously, furnished
, with its round table, its divan, and its bronze clock under a glass shade. The
re was a narrow pierglass against the wall, and a chandelier adorned with lustre
s hung by a bronze chain from the ceiling.
   When the prince entered, Lebedeff was standing in the middle of the room, his
 back to the door. He was in his shirt-sleeves, on account of the extreme heat, 
and he seemed to have just reached the peroration of his speech, and was impress
ively beating his breast.
   His audience consisted of a youth of about fifteen years of age with a clever
 face, who had a book in his hand, though he was not reading; a young lady of tw
enty, in deep mourning, stood near him with an infant in her arms; another girl 
of thirteen, also in black, was laughing loudly, her mouth wide open; and on the
 sofa lay a handsome young man, with black hair and eyes, and a suspicion of bea
rd and whiskers. He frequently interrupted the speaker and argued with him, to t
he great delight of the others.
   "Lukian Timofeyovitch! Lukian Timofeyovitch! Here's someone to see you! Look 
here! a gentleman to speak to you!
   Well, it's not my fault!" and the cook turned and went away red with anger.
   Lebedeff started, and at sight of the prince stood like a statue for a moment
. Then he moved up to him with an ingratiating smile, but stopped short again.
   "Prince! ex-ex-excellency!" he stammered. Then suddenly he ran towards the gi
rl with the infant, a movement so unexpected by her that she staggered and fell 
back, but next moment he was threatening the other child, who was standing, stil
l laughing, in the doorway. She screamed, and ran towards the kitchen. Lebedeff 
stamped his foot angrily; then, seeing the prince regarding him with amazement, 
he murmured apologetically-"Pardon to show respect! he-he!"
   " You are quite wrong" began the prince.
   "At once at once in one moment!"
   He rushed like a whirlwind from the room, and Muishkin looked inquiringly at 
the others.
   They were all laughing, and the guest joined in the chorus.
   "He has gone to get his coat," said the boy.
   "How annoying!" exclaimed the prince. "I thought Tell me, is he"
   "You think he is drunk?" cried the young man on the sofa. " Not in the least.
 He's only had three or four small glasses, perhaps five; but what is that? The 
usual thing!"
   As the prince opened his mouth to answer, he was interrupted by the girl, who
se sweet face wore an expression of absolute frankness.
   "He never drinks much in the morning; if you have come to talk business with 
him, do it now. It is the best time. He sometimes comes back drunk in the evenin
g; but just now he passes the greater part of the evening in tears, and reads pa
ssages of Holy Scripture aloud, because our mother died five weeks ago."
   "No doubt he ran off because he did not know what to say to you," said the yo
uth on the divan. "I bet he is trying to cheat you, and is thinking how best to 
do it."
   Just then Lebedeff returned, having put on his coat.
   "Five weeks!" said he, wiping his eyes. "Only five weeks! Poor orphans!"
   "But why wear a coat in holes," asked the girl, "when your new one is hanging
 behind the door? Did you not see it?"
   "Hold your tongue, dragon-fly!" he scolded. "What a plague you are!" He stamp
ed his foot irritably, but she only laughed, and answered:
   "Are you trying to frighten me? I am not Tania, you know, and I don't intend 
to run away. Look, you are waking Lubotchka, and she will have convulsions again
. Why do you shout like that?"
   "Well, well! I won't again," said the master of the house his anxiety getting
 the better of his temper. He went up to his daughter, and looked at the child i
n her arms, anxiously making the sign of the cross over her three times. "God bl
ess her! God bless her!" he cried with emotion. "This little creature is my daug
hter Luboff," addressing the prince. "My wife, Helena, died-at her birth; and th
is is my big daughter Vera, in mourning, as you see; and this, this, oh, this po
inting to the young man on the divan
   "Well, go on! never mind me!" mocked the other. "Don't be afraid!"
   "Excellency! Have you read that account of the murder of the Zemarin family, 
in the newspaper?" cried Lebedeff, all of a sudden.
   "Yes," said Muishkin, with some surprise.
   "Well, that is the murderer! It is he-in fact-"
   "What do you mean?" asked the visitor.
   "I am speaking allegorically, of course; but he will be the murderer of a Zem
arin family in the future. He is getting ready. "
   They all laughed, and the thought crossed the prince's mind that perhaps Lebe
deff was really trifling in this way because he foresaw inconvenient questions, 
and wanted to gain time.
   "He is a traitor! a conspirator!" shouted Lebedeff, who seemed to have lost a
ll control over himself. " A monster! a slanderer!
   Ought I to treat him as a nephew, the son of my sister Anisia?"
   "Oh! do be quiet! You must be drunk! He has taken it into his head to play th
e lawyer, prince, and he practices speechifying, and is always repeating his elo
quent pleadings to his children.
   And who do you think was his last client? An old woman who had been robbed of
 five hundred roubles, her all, by some rogue of a usurer, besought him to take 
up her case, instead of which he defended the usurer himself, a Jew named Zeidle
r, because this Jew promised to give him fifty roubles"
   "It was to be fifty if I won the case, only five if I lost," interrupted Lebe
deff, speaking in a low tone, a great contrast to his earlier manner.
   "Well! naturally he came to grief: the law is not administered as it used to 
be, and he only got laughed at for his pains. But he was much pleased with himse
lf in spite of that. 'Most learned judge!' said he, 'picture this unhappy man, c
rippled by age and infirmities, who gains his living by honourable toil-picture 
him, I repeat, robbed of his all, of his last mouthful; remember, I entreat you,
 the words of that learned legislator, "Let mercy and justice alike rule the cou
rts of law."' Now, would you believe it, excellency, every morning he recites th
is speech to us from beginning to end, exactly as he spoke it before the magistr
ate.
   To-day we have heard it for the fifth time. He was just starting again when y
ou arrived, so much does he admire it. He is now preparing to undertake another 
case. I think, by the way, that you are Prince Muishkin? Colia tells me you are 
the cleverest man he has ever known"
   "The cleverest in the world," interrupted his uncle hastily.
   "I do not pay much attention to that opinion," continued the young man calmly
. "Colia is very fond of you, but he," pointing to Lebedeff, "is flattering you.
 I can assure you I have no intention of flattering you, or anyone else, but at 
least you have some common-sense. Well, will you judge between us? Shall we ask 
the prince to act as arbitrator?" he went on, addressing his uncle.
   "I am so glad you chanced to come here, prince."
   "I agree," said Lebedeff, firmly, looking round involuntarily at his daughter
, who had come nearer, and was listening attentively to the conversation.
   "What is it all about?" asked the prince, frowning. His head ached, and he fe
lt sure that Lebedeff was trying to cheat him in some way, and only talking to p
ut off the explanation that he had come for.
   "I will tell you all the story. I am his nephew; he did speak the truth there
, although he is generally telling lies. I am at the University, and have not ye
t finished my course. I mean to do so, and I shall, for I have a determined char
acter. I must, however, find something to do for the present, and therefore I ha
ve got employment on the railway at twenty-four roubles a month. I admit that my
 uncle has helped me once or twice before.
   Well, I had twenty roubles in my pocket, and I gambled them away.
   Can you believe that I should be so low, so base, as to lose money in that wa
y?"
   "And the man who won it is a rogue, a rogue whom you ought not to have paid!"
 cried Lebedeff.
   "Yes, he is a rogue, but I was obliged to pay him," said the young man. "As t
o his being a rogue, he is assuredly that, and I am not saying it because he bea
t you. He is an ex-lieutenant, prince, dismissed from the service, a teacher of 
boxing, and one of Rogojin's followers. They are all lounging about the pavement
s now that Rogojin has turned them off. Of course, the worst of it is that, know
ing he was a rascal, and a card-sharper, I none the less played palki with him, 
and risked my last rouble. To tell the truth, I thought to myself, 'If I lose, I
 will go to my uncle, and I am sure he will not refuse to help me.' Now that was
 base-cowardly and base!"
   "That is so," observed Lebedeff quietly; "cowardly and base."
   "Well, wait a bit, before you begin to triumph," said the nephew viciously; f
or the words seemed to irritate him. "He is delighted! I came to him here and to
ld him everything: I acted honourably, for I did not excuse myself. I spoke most
 severely of my conduct, as everyone here can witness. But I must smarten myself
 up before I take up my new post, for I am really like a tramp. Just look at my 
boots! I cannot possibly appear like this, and if I am not at the bureau at the 
time appointed, the job will be given to someone else; and I shall have to try f
or another.
   Now I only beg for fifteen roubles, and I give my word that I will never ask 
him for anything again. I am also ready to promise to repay my debt in three mon
ths' time, and I will keep my word, even if I have to live on bread and water. M
y salary will amount to seventy-five roubles in three months. The sum I now ask,
 added to what I have borrowed already, will make a total of about thirty-five r
oubles, so you see I shall have enough to pay him and confound him! if he wants 
interest, he shall have that, too!
   Haven't I always paid back the money he lent me before? Why should he be so m
ean now? He grudges my having paid that lieutenant; there can be no other reason
! That's the kind he is-a dog in the manger!"
   "And he won't go away!" cried Lebedeff. "He has installed himself here, and h
ere he remains!"
   "I have told you already, that I will not go away until I have got what I ask
. Why are you smiling, prince? You look as if you disapproved of me."
   "I am not smiling, but I really think you are in the wrong, somewhat," replie
d Muishkin, reluctantly.
   "Don't shuffle! Say plainly that you think that I am quite wrong, without any
 'somewhat'! Why 'somewhat'?"
   "I will say you are quite wrong, if you wish."
   "If I wish! That's good, I must say! Do you think I am deceived as to the fla
grant impropriety of my conduct? I am quite aware that his money is his own, and
 that my action -As much like an attempt at extortion. But you-you don't know wh
at life is! If people don't learn by experience, they never understand. They mus
t be taught. My intentions are perfectly honest; on my conscience he will lose n
othing, and I will pay back the money with interest. Added to which he has had t
he moral satisfaction of seeing me disgraced. What does he want more? and what i
s he good for if he never helps anyone? Look what he does himself! just ask him 
about his dealings with others, how he deceives people! How did he manage to buy
 this house? You may cut off my head if he has not let you in for something-and 
if he is not trying to cheat you again. You are smiling. You don't believe me?"
   "It seems to me that all this has nothing to do with your affairs," remarked 
the prince.
   "I have lain here now for three days," cried the young man without noticing, 
"and I have seen a lot! Fancy! he suspects his daughter, that angel, that orphan
, my cousin-he suspects her, and every evening he searches her room, to see if s
he has a lover hidden in it! He comes here too on tiptoe, creeping softly-oh, so
 softly-and looks under the sofa-my bed, you know. He is mad with suspicion, and
 sees a thief in every corner. He runs about all night long; he was up at least 
seven times last night, to satisfy himself that the windows and doors were barre
d, and to peep into the oven. That man who appears in court for scoundrels, rush
es in here in the night and prays, lying prostrate, banging his head on the grou
nd by the half-hour-and for whom do you think he prays? Who are the sinners figu
ring in his drunken petitions? I have heard him with my own ears praying for the
 repose of the soul of the Countess du Barry! Colia heard it too.
   He is as mad as a March hare!"
   "You hear how he slanders me, prince," said Lebedeff, almost beside himself w
ith rage. "I may be a drunkard, an evil-doer, a thief, but at least I can say on
e thing for myself. He does not know-how should he, mocker that he is?-that when
 he came into the world it was I who washed him, and dressed him in his swathing
-bands, for my sister Anisia had lost her husband, and was in great poverty. I w
as very little better off than she, but I sat up night after night with her, and
 nursed both mother and child; I used to go downstairs and steal wood for them f
rom the house-porter. How often did I sing him to sleep when I was half dead wit
h hunger! In short, I was more than a father to him, and now-now he jeers at me!
 Even if I did cross myself, and pray for the repose of the soul of the Comtesse
 du Barry, what does it matter? Three days ago, for the first time in my life, I
 read her biography in an historical dictionary. Do you know who she was?
   You there!" addressing his nephew. "Speak! do you know?"
   "Of course no one knows anything about her but you," muttered the young man i
n a would-be jeering tone.
   "She was a Countess who rose from shame to reign like a Queen. An Empress wro
te to her, with her own hand, as 'Ma chere cousine.'
   At a lever-du-roi one morning (do you know what a lever-du-roi was?)-a Cardin
al, a Papal legate, offered to put on her stockings; a high and holy person like
 that looked on it as an honour! Did you know this? I see by your expression tha
t you did not! Well, how did she die? Answer!"
   "Oh! do stop-you are too absurd!"
   "This is how she died. After all this honour and glory, after having been alm
ost a Queen, she was guillotined by that butcher, Samson. She was quite innocent
, but it had to be done, for the satisfaction of the fishwives of Paris. She was
 so terrified, that she did not understand what was happening. But when Samson s
eized her head, and pushed her under the knife with his foot, she cried out: 'Wa
it a moment! wait a moment, monsieur!' Well, because of that moment of bitter su
ffering, perhaps the Saviour will pardon her other faults, for one cannot imagin
e a greater agony. As I read the story my heart bled for her. And what does it m
atter to you, little worm, if I implored the Divine mercy for her, great sinner 
as she was, as I said my evening prayer? I might have done it because I doubted 
if anyone had ever crossed himself for her sake before. It may be that in the ot
her world she will rejoice to think that a sinner like herself has cried to heav
en for the salvation of her soul. Why are you laughing? You believe nothing, ath
eist! And your story was not even correct! If you had listened to what I was say
ing, you would have heard that I did not only pray for the Comtesse du Barry. I 
said, 'Oh Lord! give rest to the soul of that great sinner, the Comtesse du Barr
y, and to all unhappy ones like her.' You see that is quite a different thing, f
or how many sinners there are, how many women, who have passed through the trial
s of this life, are now suffering and groaning in purgatory! I prayed for you, t
oo, in spite of your insolence and impudence, also for your fellows, as it seems
 that you claim to know how I pray"
   "Oh! that's enough in all conscience! Pray for whom you choose, and the devil
 take them and you! We have a scholar here; you did not know that, prince?" he c
ontinued, with a sneer. "He reads all sorts of books and memoirs now."
   "At any rate, your uncle has a kind heart," remarked the prince, who really h
ad to force himself to speak to the nephew, so much did he dislike him.
   "Oh, now you are going to praise him! He will be set up! He puts his hand on 
his heart, and he is delighted! I never said he was a man without heart, but he 
is a rascal-that's the pity of it. And then, he is addicted to drink, and his mi
nd is unhinged, like that of most people who have taken more than is good for th
em for years. He loves his children-oh, I know that well enough! He respected my
 aunt, his late wife and he even has a sort of affection for me. He has remembere
d me in his will."
   "I shall leave you nothing!" exclaimed his uncle angrily.
   "Listen to me, Lebedeff," said the prince in a decided voice, turning his bac
k on the young man. "I know by experience that when you choose, you can be busin
ess-like.. I. I have very little time to spare, and if you By the way-excuse me-w
hat is your Christian name? I have forgotten it."
   "Ti-Ti-Timofey."
   "And?"
   "Lukianovitch."
   Everyone in the room began to laugh.
   "He is telling lies!" cried the nephew. "Even now he cannot speak the truth. 
He is not called Timofey Lukianovitch, prince, but Lukian Timofeyovitch. Now do 
tell us why you must needs lie about it? Lukian or Timofey, it is all the same t
o you, and what difference can it make to the prince? He tells lies without the 
least necessity, simply by force of habit, I assure you."
   "Is that true?" said the prince impatiently.
   "My name really is Lukian Timofeyovitch," acknowledged Lebedeff, lowering his
 eyes, and putting his hand on his heart.
   "Well, for God's sake, what made you say the other?"
   "To humble myself," murmured Lebedeff.
   "What on earth do you mean? Oh I if only I knew where Colia was at this momen
t!" cried the prince, standing up, as if to go.
   "I can tell you all about Colia," said the young man "Oh! no, no!" said Lebed
eff, hurriedly.
   "Colia spent the night here, and this morning went after his father, whom you
 let out of prison by paying his debts-Heaven only knows why! Yesterday the gene
ral promised to come and lodge here, but he did not appear. Most probably he sle
pt at the hotel close by. No doubt Colia is there, unless he has gone to Pavlofs
k to see the Epanchins. He had a little money, and was intending to go there yes
terday. He must be either at the hotel or at Pavlofsk."
   "At Pavlofsk! He is at Pavlofsk, undoubtedly!" interrupted Lebedeff "But come-
let us go into the garden-we will have coffee there" And Lebedeff seized the prin
ce's arm, and led him from the room. They went across the yard, and found themse
lves in a delightful little garden with the trees already in their summer dress 
of green, thanks to the unusually fine weather. Lebedeff invited his guest to si
t down on a green seat before a table of the same colour fixed in the earth, and
 took a seat facing him. In a few minutes the coffee appeared, and the prince di
d not refuse it. The host kept his eyes fixed on Muishkin, with an expression of
 passionate servility.
   "I knew nothing about your home before," said the prince absently, as if he w
ere thinking of something else.
   "Poor orphans," began Lebedeff, his face assuming a mournful air, but he stop
ped short, for the other looked at him inattentively, as if he had already forgo
tten his own remark. They waited a few minutes in silence, while Lebedeff sat wi
th his eyes fixed mournfully on the young man's face.
   "Well!" said the latter, at last rousing himself. "Ah! yes! You know why I ca
me, Lebedeff. Your letter brought me. Speak! Tell me all about it."
   The clerk, rather confused, tried to say something, hesitated, began to speak
, and again stopped. The prince looked at him gravely.
   "I think I understand, Lukian Timofeyovitch: you were not sure that I should 
come. You did not think I should start at the first word from you, and you merel
y wrote to relieve your conscience.
   However, you see now that I have come, and I have had enough of trickery. Giv
e up serving, or trying to serve, two masters.
   Rogojin has been here these three weeks. Have you managed to sell her to him 
as you did before? Tell me the truth."
   "He discovered everything, the monster himself"
   "Don't abuse him; though I dare say you have something to complain of"
   "He beat me, he thrashed me unmercifully!" replied Lebedeff vehemently. "He s
et a dog on me in Moscow, a bloodhound, a terrible beast that chased me all down
 the street."
   "You seem to take me for a child, Lebedeff. Tell me, is it a fact that she le
ft him while they were in Moscow?"
   "Yes, it is a fact, and this time, let me tell you, on the very eve of their 
marriage! It was a question of minutes when she slipped off to Petersburg. She c
ame to me directly she arrived-'Save me, Lukian! find me some refuge, and say no
thing to the prince!' She is afraid of you, even more than she is of him, and in
 that she shows her wisdom!" And Lebedeff slily put his finger to his brow as he
 said the last words.
   "And now it is you who have brought them together again?"
   "Excellency, how could I, how could I prevent it?"
   "That will do. I can find out for myself. Only tell me, where is she now? At 
his house? With him?"
   "Oh no! Certainly not! 'I am free,' she says; you know how she insists on tha
t point. 'I am entirely free.' She repeats it over and over again. She is living
 in Petersburgskaia, with my sisterin-law, as I told you in my letter."
   "She is there at this moment?"
   "Yes, unless she has gone to Pavlofsk: the fine weather may have tempted her,
 perhaps, into the country, with Daria Alexeyevna. 'I am quite free,' she says. 
Only yesterday she boasted of her freedom to Nicolai Ardalionovitch-a bad sign,"
 added Lebedeff, smiling.
   "Colia goes to see her often, does he not?"
   "He is a strange boy, thoughtless, and inclined to be indiscreet."
   "Is it long since you saw her?"
   "I go to see her every day, every day."
   "Then you were there yesterday?"
   "N-no: I have not been these three last days."
   "It is a pity you have taken too much wine, Lebedeff I want to ask you someth
ing but"
   "All right! all right! I am not drunk," replied the clerk, preparing to liste
n.
   "Tell me, how was she when you left her?"
   "She is a woman who is seeking "
   "Seeking?"
   "She seems always to be searching about, as if she had lost something. The me
re idea of her coming marriage disgusts her; she looks on it as an insult. She c
ares as much for HIM as for a piece of orange-peel-not more. Yet I am much mista
ken if she does not look on him with fear and trembling. She forbids his name to
 be mentioned before her, and they only meet when unavoidable. He understands, w
ell enough! But it must be gone through She is restless, mocking, deceitful, vio
lent"
   "Deceitful and violent?"
   "Yes, violent. I can give you a proof of it. A few days ago she tried to pull
 my hair because I said something that annoyed her.
   I tried to soothe her by reading the Apocalypse aloud."
   "What?" exclaimed the prince, thinking he had not heard aright.
   "By reading the Apocalypse. The lady has a restless imagination, he-he! She h
as a liking for conversation on serious subjects, of any kind; in fact they plea
se her so much, that it flatters her to discuss them. Now for fifteen years at l
east I have studied the Apocalypse, and she agrees with me in thinking that the 
present is the epoch represented by the third horse, the black one whose rider h
olds a measure in his hand. It seems to me that everything is ruled by measure i
n our century; all men are clamouring for their rights; 'a measure of wheat for 
a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny.' But, added to this, men desi
re freedom of mind and body, a pure heart, a healthy life, and all God's good gi
fts. Now by pleading their rights alone, they will never attain all this, so the
 white horse, with his rider Death, comes next, and is followed by Hell. We talk
ed about this matter when we met, and it impressed her very much."
   "Do you believe all this?" asked Muishkin, looking curiously at his companion
.
   "I both believe it and explain it. I am but a poor creature, a beggar, an ato
m in the scale of humanity. Who has the least respect for Lebedeff? He is a targ
et for all the world, the butt of any fool who chooses to kick him. But in inter
preting revelation I am the equal of anyone, great as he may be! Such is the pow
er of the mind and the spirit. I have made a lordly personage tremble, as he sat
 in his armchair only by talking to him of things concerning the spirit. Two year
s ago, on Easter Eve, His Excellency Nil Alexeyovitch, whose subordinate I was t
hen, wished to hear what I had to say, and sent a message by Peter Zakkaritch to
 ask me to go to his private room. 'They tell me you expound the prophecies rela
ting to Antichrist,' said he, when we were alone. 'Is that so?' ' Yes,' I answer
ed unhesitatingly, and I began to give some comments on the Apostle's allegorica
l vision. At first he smiled, but when we reached the numerical computations and
 correspondences, he trembled, and turned pale. Then he begged me to close the b
ook, and sent me away, promising to put my name on the reward list.
   That took place as I said on the eve of Easter, and eight days later his soul
 returned to God."
   "What?"
   "It is the truth. One evening after dinner he stumbled as he stepped out of h
is carriage. He fell, and struck his head on the curb, and died immediately. He 
was seventy-three years of age, and had a red face, and white hair; he deluged h
imself with scent, and was always smiling like a child. Peter Zakkaritch recalle
d my interview with him, and said, 'YOU FORETOLD HIS DEATH.'"
   The prince rose from his seat, and Lebedeff, surprised to see his guest prepa
ring to go so soon, remarked: "You are not interested?" in a respectful tone.
   "I am not very well, and my head aches. Doubtless the effect of the journey,"
 replied the prince, frowning.
   "You should go into the country," said Lebedeff timidly.
   The prince seemed to be considering the suggestion.
   "You see, I am going into the country myself in three days, with my children 
and belongings. The little one is delicate; she needs change of air; and during 
our absence this house will be done up.
   I am going to Pavlofsk."
   "You are going to Pavlofsk too?" asked the prince sharply.
   "Everybody seems to be going there. Have you a house in that neighbourhood?"
   "I don't know of many people going to Pavlofsk, and as for the house, Ivan Pt
itsin has let me one of his villas rather cheaply.
   It is a pleasant place, lying on a hill surrounded by trees, and one can live
 there for a mere song. There is good music to be heard, so no wonder it is popu
lar. I shall stay in the lodge. As to the villa itself.. "
   "Have you let it?"
   "N-no-not exactly."
   "Let it to me," said the prince.
   Now this was precisely what Lebedeff had made up his mind to do in the last t
hree minutes. Not that he bad any difficulty in finding a tenant; in fact the ho
use was occupied at present by a chance visitor, who had told Lebedeff that he w
ould perhaps take it for the summer months. The clerk knew very well that this "
PERHAPS" meant "CERTAINLY," but as he thought he could make more out of a tenant
 like the prince, he felt justified in speaking vaguely about the present inhabi
tant's intentions. "This is quite a coincidence," thought he, and when the subje
ct of price was mentioned, he made a gesture with his hand, as if to waive away 
a question of so little importance.
   "Oh well, as you like!" said Muishkin. "I will think it over. You shall lose 
nothing!"
   They were walking slowly across the garden.
   "But if you I could" stammered Lebedeff, "ifif you please, prince, tell you some
thing on the subject which would interest you, I am sure." He spoke in wheedling
 tones, and wriggled as he walked along.
   Muishkin stopped short.
   "Daria Alexeyevna also has a villa at Pavlofsk."
   "Well?"
   "A certain person is very friendly with her, and intends to visit her pretty 
often."
   Well?"
   "Aglaya Ivanovna"
   "Oh stop, Lebedeff!" interposed Muishkin, feeling as if he had been touched o
n an open wound. "That that has nothing to do with me. I should like to know when
 you are going to start. The sooner the better as far as I am concerned, for I a
m at an hotel."
   They had left the garden now, and were crossing the yard on their way to the 
gate.
   "Well, leave your hotel at once and come here; then we can all go together to
 Pavlofsk the day after tomorrow."
   "I will think about it," said the prince dreamily, and went off.
   The clerk stood looking after his guest, struck by his sudden absent-mindedne
ss. He had not even remembered to say goodbye, and Lebedeff was the more surpris
ed at the omission, as he knew by experience how courteous the prince usually wa
s.
      III
   It was now close on twelve o'clock.
   The prince knew that if he called at the Epanchins' now he would only find th
e general, and that the latter might probably carry him straight off to Pavlofsk
 with him; whereas there was one visit he was most anxious to make without delay
.
   So at the risk of missing General Epanchin altogether, and thus postponing hi
s visit to Pavlofsk for a day, at least, the prince decided to go and look for t
he house he desired to find.
   The visit he was about to pay was, in some respects, a risky one.
   He was in two minds about it, but knowing that the house was in the Gorohovay
a, not far from the Sadovaya, he determined to go in that direction, and to try 
to make up his mind on the way.
   Arrived at the point where the Gorohovaya crosses the Sadovaya, he was surpri
sed to find how excessively agitated he was. He had no idea that his heart could
 beat so painfully.
   One house in the Gorohovaya began to attract his attention long before he rea
ched it, and the prince remembered afterwards that he had said to himself: "That
 is the house, I'm sure of it." He came up to it quite curious to discover wheth
er he had guessed right, and felt that he would be disagreeably impressed to fin
d that he had actually done so. The house was a large gloomylooking structure, w
ithout the slightest claim to architectural beauty, in colour a dirty green. The
re are a few of these old houses, built towards the end of the last century, sti
ll standing in that part of St. Petersburg, and showing little change from their
 original form and colour. They are solidly built, and are remarkable for the th
ickness of their walls, and for the fewness of their windows, many of which are 
covered by gratings. On the ground-floor there is usually a money-changer's shop
, and the owner lives over it. Without as well as within, the houses seem inhosp
itable and mysterious-an impression which is difficult to explain, unless it has
 something to do with the actual architectural style. These houses are almost ex
clusively inhabited by the merchant class.
   Arrived at the gate, the prince looked up at the legend over it, which ran:
   "House of Rogojin, hereditary and honourable citizen."
   He hesitated no longer; but opened the glazed door at the bottom of the outer
 stairs and made his way up to the second storey. The place was dark and gloomy-
looking; the walls of the stone staircase were painted a dull red. Rogojin and h
is mother and brother occupied the whole of the second floor. The servant who op
ened the door to Muishkin led him, without taking his name, through several room
s and up and down many steps until they arrived at a door, where he knocked.
   Parfen Rogojin opened the door himself.
   On seeing the prince he became deadly white, and apparently fixed to the grou
nd, so that he was more like a marble statue than a human being. The prince had 
expected some surprise, but Rogojin evidently considered his visit an impossible
 and miraculous event. He stared with an expression almost of terror, and his li
ps twisted into a bewildered smile.
   "Parfen! perhaps my visit is ill-timed. I-I can go away again if you like," s
aid Muishkin at last, rather embarrassed.
   "No, no; it's all right, come in," said Parfen, recollecting himself.
   They were evidently on quite familiar terms. In Moscow they had had many occa
sions of meeting; indeed, some few of those meetings were but too vividly impres
sed upon their memories. They had not met now, however, for three months.
   The deathlike pallor, and a sort of slight convulsion about the lips, had not
 left Rogojin's face. Though he welcomed his guest, he was still obviously much 
disturbed. As he invited the prince to sit down near the table, the latter happe
ned to turn towards him, and was startled by the strange expression on his face.
 A painful recollection flashed into his mind. He stood for a time, looking stra
ight at Rogojin, whose eyes seemed to blaze like fire. At last Rogojin smiled, t
hough he still looked agitated and shaken.
   "What are you staring at me like that for?" he muttered. "Sit down."
   The prince took a chair.
   "Parfen," he said, "tell me honestly, did you know that I was coming to Peter
sburg or no?"
   "Oh, I supposed you were coming," the other replied, smiling sarcastically, a
nd I was right in my supposition, you see; but how was I to know that you would 
come TODAY?"
   A certain strangeness and impatience in his manner impressed the prince very 
forcibly.
   "And if you had known that I was coming today, why be so irritated about it?"
 he asked, in quiet surprise.
   "Why did you ask me?"
   "Because when I jumped out of the train this morning, two eyes glared at me j
ust as yours did a moment since."
   "Ha! and whose eyes may they have been?" said Rogojin, suspiciously. It seeme
d to the prince that he was trembling.
   "I don't know; I thought it was a hallucination. I often have hallucinations 
nowadays. I feel just as I did five years ago when my fits were about to come on
."
   "Well, perhaps it was a hallucination, I don't know," said Parfen.
   He tried to give the prince an affectionate smile, and it seemed to the latte
r as though in this smile of his something had broken, and that he could not men
d it, try as he would.
   "Shall you go abroad again then?" he asked, and suddenly added,
   "Do you remember how we came up in the train from Pskoff together? You and yo
ur cloak and leggings, eh?"
   And Rogojin burst out laughing, this time with unconcealed malice, as though 
he were glad that he had been able to find an opportunity for giving vent to it.
   "Have you quite taken up your quarters here?" asked the prince "Yes, I'm at h
ome. Where else should I go to?"
   "We haven't met for some time. Meanwhile I have heard things about you which 
I should not have believed to be possible."
   "What of that? People will say anything," said Rogojin drily.
   "At all events, you've disbanded your troop-and you are living in your own ho
use instead of being fast and loose about the place; that's all very good. Is th
is house all yours, or joint property?"
   "It is my mother's. You get to her apartments by that passage."
   "Where's your brother?"
   "In the other wing."
   "Is he married?"
   "Widower. Why do you want to know all this?"
   The prince looked at him, but said nothing. He had suddenly relapsed into mus
ing, and had probably not heard the question at all. Rogojin did not insist upon
 an answer, and there was silence for a few moments.
   "I guessed which was your house from a hundred yards off," said the prince at
 last.
   "Why so?"
   "I don't quite know. Your house has the aspect of yourself and all your famil
y; it bears the stamp of the Rogojin life; but ask me why I think so, and I can 
tell you nothing. It is nonsense, of course. I am nervous about this kind of thi
ng troubling me so much. I had never before imagined what sort of a house you wo
uld live in, and yet no sooner did I set eyes on this one than I said to myself 
that it must be yours."
   "Really!" said Rogojin vaguely, not taking in what the prince meant by his ra
ther obscure remarks.
   The room they were now sitting in was a large one, lofty but dark, well furni
shed, principally with writing-tables and desks covered with papers and books. A
 wide sofa covered with red morocco evidently served Rogojin for a bed. On the t
able beside which the prince had been invited to seat himself lay some books; on
e containing a marker where the reader had left off, was a volume of Solovieff's
 History. Some oil-paintings in worn gilded frames hung on the walls, but it was
 impossible to make out what subjects they represented, so blackened were they b
y smoke and age. One, a life-sized portrait, attracted the prince's attention. I
t showed a man of about fifty, wearing a long ridingcoat of German cut. He had t
wo medals on his breast; his beard was white, short and thin; his face yellow an
d wrinkled, with a sly, suspicious expression in the eyes.
   "That is your father, is it not?" asked the prince.
   "Yes, it is," replied Rogojin with an unpleasant smile, as if he had expected
 his guest to ask the question, and then to make some disagreeable remark.
   "Was he one of the Old Believers?"
   "No, he went to church, but to tell the truth he really preferred the old rel
igion. This was his study and is now mine. Why did you ask if he were an Old Bel
iever?"
   "Are you going to be married here?"
   "Ye-yes!" replied Rogojin, starting at the unexpected question.
   "Soon?"
   "You know yourself it does not depend on me."
   "Parfen, I am not your enemy, and I do not intend to oppose your intentions i
n any way. I repeat this to you now just as I said it to you once before on a ve
ry similar occasion. When you were arranging for your projected marriage in Mosc
ow, I did not interfere with you-you know I did not. That first time she fled to
 me from you, from the very altar almost, and begged me to 'save her from you.' 
Afterwards she ran away from me again, and you found her and arranged your marri
age with her once more; and now, I hear, she has run away from you and come to P
etersburg.
   Is it true? Lebedeff wrote me to this effect, and that's why I came here. Tha
t you had once more arranged matters with Nastasia Philipovna I only learned las
t night in the train from a friend of yours, Zaleshoff-if you wish to know.
   "I confess I came here with an object. I wished to persuade Nastasia to go ab
road for her health; she requires it. Both mind and body need a change badly. I 
did not intend to take her abroad myself. I was going to arrange for her to go w
ithout me. Now I tell you honestly, Parfen, if it is true that all is made up be
tween you, I will not so much as set eyes upon her, and I will never even come t
o see you again.
   "You know quite well that I am telling the truth, because I have always been 
frank with you. I have never concealed my own opinion from you. I have always to
ld you that I consider a marriage between you and her would be ruin to her. You 
would also be ruined, and perhaps even more hopelessly. If this marriage were to
 be broken off again, I admit I should be greatly pleased; but at the same time 
I have not the slightest intention of trying to part you. You may be quite easy 
in your mind, and you need not suspect me. You know yourself whether I was ever 
really your rival or not, even when she ran away and came to me.
   "There, you are laughing at me-I know why you laugh. It is perfectly true tha
t we lived apart from one another all the time, in different towns. I told you b
efore that I did not love her with love, but with pity! You said then that you u
nderstood me; did you really understand me or not? What hatred there is in your 
eyes at this moment! I came to relieve your mind, because you are dear to me als
o. I love you very much, Parfen; and now I shall go away and never come back aga
in. Goodbye."
   The prince rose.
   "Stay a little," said Parfen, not leaving his chair and resting his head on h
is right hand. "I haven't seen you for a long time."
   The prince sat down again. Both were silent for a few moments.
   "When you are not with me I hate you, Lef Nicolaievitch. I have loathed you e
very day of these three months since I last saw you.
   By heaven I have!" said Rogojin." I could have poisoned you at any minute. No
w, you have been with me but a quarter of an hour, and all my malice seems to ha
ve melted away, and you are as dear to me as ever. Stay here a little longer."
   "When I am with you you trust me; but as soon as my back is turned you suspec
t me," said the prince, smiling, and trying to hide his emotion.
   "I trust your voice, when I hear you speak. I quite understand that you and I
 cannot be put on a level, of course."
   "Why did you add that?-There! Now you are cross again," said the prince, wond
ering.
   "We were not asked, you see. We were made different, with different tastes an
d feelings, without being consulted. You say you love her with pity. I have no p
ity for her. She hates me-that's the plain truth of the matter. I dream of her e
very night, and always that she is laughing at me with another man. And so she d
oes laugh at me. She thinks no more of marrying me than if she were changing her
 shoe. Would you believe it, I haven't seen her for five days, and I daren't go 
near her. She asks me what I come for, as if she were not content with having di
sgraced me-"
   "Disgraced you! How?"
   "Just as though you didn't know! Why, she ran away from me, and went to you. 
You admitted it yourself, just now."
   "But surely you do not believe that she"
   "That she did not disgrace me at Moscow with that officer.
   Zemtuznikoff? I know for certain she did, after having fixed our marriage-day
 herself!"
   "Impossible!" cried the prince.
   "I know it for a fact," replied Rogojin, with conviction.
   "It is not like her, you say? My friend, that's absurd. Perhaps such an act w
ould horrify her, if she were with you, but it is quite different where I am con
cerned. She looks on me as vermin.
   Her affair with Keller was simply to make a laughing-stock of me.
   You don't know what a fool she made of me in Moscow; and the money I spent ov
er her! The money! the money!"
   "And you can marry her now, Parfen! What will come of it all?" said the princ
e, with dread in his voice.
   Rogojin gazed back gloomily, and with a terrible expression in his eyes, but 
said nothing.
   "I haven't been to see her for five days," he repeated, after a slight pause.
 "I'm afraid of being turned out. She says she's still her own mistress, and may
 turn me off altogether, and go abroad. She told me this herself," he said, with
 a peculiar glance at Muishkin. "I think she often does it merely to frighten me
. She is always laughing at me, for some reason or other; but at other times she
's angry, and won't say a word, and that's what I'm afraid of. I took her a shaw
l one day, the like of which she might never have seen, although she did live in
 luxury and she gave it away to her maid, Katia. Sometimes when I can keep away 
no longer, I steal past the house on the sly, and once I watched at the gate til
l dawn-I thought something was going on-and she saw me from the window. She aske
d me what I should do if I found she had deceived me. I said, 'You know well eno
ugh.'"
   "What did she know?" cried the prince.
   "How was I to tell?" replied Rogojin, with an angry laugh. "I did my best to 
catch her tripping in Moscow, but did not succeed.
   However, I caught hold of her one day, and said: 'You are engaged to be marri
ed into a respectable family, and do you know what sort of a woman you are? THAT
'S the sort of woman you are,' I said."
   "You told her that?"
   "Yes."
   "Well, go on."
   "She said, 'I wouldn't even have you for a footman now, much less for a husba
nd.' 'I shan't leave the house,' I said, 'so it doesn't matter.' 'Then I shall c
all somebody and have you kicked out,' she cried. So then I rushed at her, and b
eat her till she was bruised all over."
   "Impossible!" cried the prince, aghast.
   "I tell you it's true," said Rogojin quietly, but with eyes ablaze with passi
on.
   "Then for a day and a half I neither slept, nor ate, nor drank, and would not
 leave her. I knelt at her feet: 'I shall die here,'
   I said, 'if you don't forgive me; and if you have me turned out, I shall drow
n myself; because, what should I be without you now?'
   She was like a madwoman all that day; now she would cry; now she would threat
en me with a knife; now she would abuse me. She called in Zaleshoff and Keller, 
and showed me to them, shamed me in their presence. 'Let's all go to the theatre
,' she says, 'and leave him here if he won't go-it's not my business. They'll gi
ve you some tea, Parfen Semeonovitch, while I am away, for you must be hungry.' 
She came back from the theatre alone. 'Those cowards wouldn't come,' she said. '
They are afraid of you, and tried to frighten me, too. "He won't go away as he c
ame," they said,
   "he'll cut your throat-see if he doesn't." Now, I shall go to my bedroom, and
 I shall not even lock my door, just to show you how much I am afraid of you. Yo
u must be shown that once for all. Did you have tea?' 'No,' I said, 'and I don't
 intend to.' 'Ha, ha! you are playing off your pride against your stomach! That 
sort of heroism doesn't sit well on you,' she said.
   "With that she did as she had said she would; she went to bed, and did not lo
ck her door. In the morning she came out. 'Are you quite mad?' she said, sharply
. 'Why, you'll die of hunger like this.' 'Forgive me,' I said. 'No, I won't, and
 I won't marry you.
   I've said it. Surely you haven't sat in this chair all night without sleeping
?' 'I didn't sleep,' I said. 'H'm! how sensible of you. And are you going to hav
e no breakfast or dinner today?'
   'I told you I wouldn't. Forgive me!' 'You've no idea how unbecoming this sort
 of thing is to you,' she said, 'it's like putting a saddle on a cow's back. Do 
you think you are frightening me? My word, what a dreadful thing that you should
 sit here and eat no food! How terribly frightened I am!' She wasn't angry long,
 and didn't seem to remember my offence at all.
   I was surprised, for she is a vindictive, resentful woman-but then I thought 
that perhaps she despised me too much to feel any resentment against me. And tha
t's the truth.
   "She came up to me and said, 'Do you know who the Pope of Rome is?' 'I've hea
rd of him,' I said. 'I suppose you've read the Universal History, Parfen Semeono
vitch, haven't you?' she asked.
   'I've learned nothing at all,' I said. 'Then I'll lend it to you to read. You
 must know there was a Roman Pope once, and he was very angry with a certain Emp
eror; so the Emperor came and neither ate nor drank, but knelt before the Pope's
 palace till he should be forgiven. And what sort of vows do you think that Empe
ror was making during all those days on his knees? Stop, I'll read it to you!' T
hen she read me a lot of verses, where it said that the Emperor spent all the ti
me vowing vengeance against the Pope. 'You don't mean to say you don't approve o
f the poem, Parfen Semeonovitch,' she says. 'All you have read out is perfectly 
true,' say I. 'Aha!' says she, 'you admit it's true, do you? And you are making 
vows to yourself that if I marry you, you will remind me of all this, and take i
t out of me.' 'I don't know,' I say, 'perhaps I was thinking like that, and perh
aps I was not.
   I'm not thinking of anything just now.' 'What are your thoughts, then?' 'I'm 
thinking that when you rise from your chair and go past me, I watch you, and fol
low you with my eyes; if your dress does but rustle, my heart sinks; if you leav
e the room, I remember every little word and action, and what your voice sounded
 like, and what you said. I thought of nothing all last night, but sat here list
ening to your sleeping breath, and heard you move a little, twice.' 'And as for 
your attack upon me,' she says, 'I suppose you never once thought of THAT?' 'Per
haps I did think of it, and perhaps not,' I say. And what if I don't either forg
ive you or marry, you' 'I tell you I shall go and drown myself.' 'H'm!' she said
, and then relapsed into silence. Then she got angry, and went out. 'I suppose y
ou'd murder me before you drowned yourself, though!' she cried as she left the r
oom.
   "An hour later, she came to me again, looking melancholy. 'I will marry you, 
Parfen Semeonovitch,' she says, not because I'm frightened of you, but because i
t's all the same to me how I ruin myself. And how can I do it better? Sit down; 
they'll bring you some dinner directly. And if I do marry you, I'll be a faithfu
l wife to you-you need not doubt that.' Then she thought a bit, and said, 'At al
l events, you are not a flunkey; at first, I thought you were no better than a f
lunkey.' And she arranged the wedding and fixed the day straight away on the spo
t.
   "Then, in another week, she had run away again, and came here to Lebedeff's; 
and when I found her here, she said to me, 'I'm not going to renounce you altoge
ther, but I wish to put off the wedding a bit longer yet-just as long as I like-
for I am still my own mistress; so you may wait, if you like.' That's how the ma
tter stands between us now. What do you think of all this, Lef Nicolaievitch?"
   "'What do you think of it yourself?" replied the prince, looking sadly at Rog
ojin.
   "As if I can think anything about it! I-" He was about to say more, but stopp
ed in despair.
   The prince rose again, as if he would leave.
   "At all events, I shall not interfere with you!" he murmured, as though makin
g answer to some secret thought of his own.
   "I'll tell you what!" cried Rogojin, and his eyes flashed fire.
   "I can't understand your yielding her to me like this; I don't understand it.
 Have you given up loving her altogether? At first you suffered badly-I know it-
I saw it. Besides, why did you come post-haste after us? Out of pity, eh? He, he
, he!" His mouth curved in a mocking smile.
   "Do you think I am deceiving you?" asked the prince.
   "No! I trust you-but I can't understand. It seems to me that your pity is gre
ater than my love." A hungry longing to speak his mind out seemed to flash in th
e man's eyes, combined with an intense anger.
   "Your love is mingled with hatred, and therefore, when your love passes, ther
e will be the greater misery," said the prince. "I tell you this, Parfen-"
   "What! that I'll cut her throat, you mean?"
   The prince shuddered.
   "You'll hate her afterwards for all your present love, and for all the tormen
t you are suffering on her account now. What seems to me the most extraordinary 
thing is, that she can again consent to marry you, after all that has passed bet
ween you. When I heard the news yesterday, I could hardly bring myself to believ
e it.
   Why, she has run twice from you, from the very altar rails, as it were. She m
ust have some presentiment of evil. What can she want with you now? Your money? 
Nonsense! Besides, I should think you must have made a fairly large hole in your
 fortune already.
   Surely it is not because she is so very anxious to find a husband? She could 
find many a one besides yourself. Anyone would be better than you, because you w
ill murder her, and I feel sure she must know that but too well by now. Is it be
cause you love her so passionately? Indeed, that may be it. I have heard that th
ere are women who want just that kind of love but still"
   The prince paused, reflectively.
   "What are you grinning at my father's portrait again for?" asked Rogojin, sud
denly. He was carefully observing every change in the expression of the prince's
 face.
   "I smiled because the idea came into my head that if it were not for this unh
appy passion of yours you might have, and would have, become just such a man as 
your father, and that very quickly, too. You'd have settled down in this house o
f yours with some silent and obedient wife. You would have spoken rarely, truste
d no one, heeded no one, and thought of nothing but making money."
   "Laugh away! She said exactly the same, almost word for word, when she saw my
 father's portrait. It's remarkable how entirely you and she are at one now-a-da
ys."
   "What, has she been here?" asked the prince with curiosity.
   "Yes! She looked long at the portrait and asked all about my father. 'You'd b
e just such another,' she said at last, and laughed. 'You have such strong passi
ons, Parfen,' she said, 'that they'd have taken you to Siberia in no time if you
 had not, luckily, intelligence as well. For you have a good deal of intelligenc
e.' (She said this-believe it or not. The first time I ever heard anything of th
at sort from her.) 'You'd soon have thrown up all this rowdyism that you indulge
 in now, and you'd have settled down to quiet, steady money-making, because you 
have little education; and here you'd have stayed just like your father before y
ou. And you'd have loved your money so that you'd amass not two million, like hi
m, but ten million; and you'd have died of hunger on your money bags to finish u
p with, for you carry everything to extremes.' There, that's exactly word for wo
rd as she said it to me. She never talked to me like that before. She always tal
ks nonsense and laughs when she's with me.
   We went all over this old house together. 'I shall change all this,' I said, 
'or else I'll buy a new house for the wedding.'
   'No, no!' she said, 'don't touch anything; leave it all as it is;
   I shall live with your mother when I marry you.' "I took her to see my mother
, and she was as respectful and kind as though she were her own daughter. Mother
 has been almost demented ever since father died-she's an old woman. She sits an
d bows from her chair to everyone she sees. If you left her alone and didn't fee
d her for three days, I don't believe she would notice it. Well, I took her hand
, and I said, 'Give your blessing to this lady, mother, she's going to be my wif
e.' So Nastasia kissed mother's hand with great feeling. 'She must have suffered
 terribly, hasn't she?' she said. She saw this book here lying before me. 'What!
 have you begun to read Russian history?' she asked. She told me once in Moscow,
 you know, that I had better get Solovieff's Russian History and read it, becaus
e I knew nothing. 'That's good,' she said, 'you go on like that, reading books. 
I'll make you a list myself of the books you ought to read first-shall I?' She h
ad never once spoken to me like this before; it was the first time I felt I coul
d breathe before her like a living creature."
   "I'm very, very glad to hear of this, Parfen," said the prince, with real fee
ling. "Who knows? Maybe God will yet bring you near to one another."
   "Never, never!" cried Rogojin, excitedly.
   "Look here, Parfen; if you love her so much, surely you must be anxious to ea
rn her respect? And if you do so wish, surely you may hope to? I said just now t
hat I considered it extraordinary that she could still be ready to marry you. We
ll, though I cannot yet understand it, I feel sure she must have some good reaso
n, or she wouldn't do it. She is sure of your love; but besides that, she must a
ttribute SOMETHING else to you-some good qualities, otherwise the thing would no
t be. What you have just said confirms my words. You say yourself that she found
 it possible to speak to you quite differently from her usual manner. You are su
spicious, you know, and jealous, therefore when anything annoying happens to you
, you exaggerate its significance. Of course, of course, she does not think so i
ll of you as you say.
   Why, if she did, she would simply be walking to death by drowning or by the k
nife, with her eyes wide open, when she married you.
   It is impossible! As if anybody would go to their death deliberately!"
   Rogojin listened to the prince's excited words with a bitter smile. His convi
ction was, apparently, unalterable.
   "How dreadfully you look at me, Parfen!" said the prince, with a feeling of d
read.
   "Water or the knife?" said the latter, at last. "Ha, ha-that's exactly why sh
e is going to marry me, because she knows for certain that the knife awaits her.
 Prince, can it be that you don't even yet see what's at the root of it all?"
   "I don't understand you."
   "Perhaps he really doesn't understand me! They do say that you are a-you know
 what! She loves another-there, you can understand that much! Just as I love her
, exactly so she loves another man. And that other man is-do you know who? It's 
you.
   There-you didn't know that, eh?"
  "I?"
   "You, you! She has loved you ever since that day, her birthday!
   Only she thinks she cannot marry you, because it would be the ruin of you. 'E
verybody knows what sort of a woman I am,' she says. She told me all this hersel
f, to my very face! She's afraid of disgracing and ruining you, she says, but it
 doesn't matter about me. She can marry me all right! Notice how much considerat
ion she shows for me!"
   "But why did she run away to me, and then again from me to-"
   "From you to me? Ha, ha! that's nothing! Why, she always acts as though she w
ere in a delirium now-a-days! Either she says, 'Come on, I'll marry you! Let's h
ave the wedding quickly!' and fixes the day, and seems in a hurry for it, and wh
en it begins to come near she feels frightened; or else some other idea gets int
o her head-goodness knows! you've seen her-you know how she goes on-laughing and
 crying and raving! There's nothing extraordinary about her having run away from
 you! She ran away because she found out how dearly she loved you. She could not
 bear to be near you. You said just now that I had found her at Moscow, when she
 ran away from you. I didn't do anything of the sort; she came to me herself, st
raight from you. 'Name the day-I'm ready!' she said. 'Let's have some champagne,
 and go and hear the gipsies sing!' I tell you she'd have thrown herself into th
e water long ago if it were not for me! She doesn't do it because I am, perhaps,
 even more dreadful to her than the water! She's marrying me out of spite; if sh
e marries me, I tell you, it will be for spite!"
   "But how do you, how can you-" began the prince, gazing with dread and horror
 at Rogojin.
   "Why don't you finish your sentence? Shall I tell you what you were thinking 
to yourself just then? You were thinking, 'How can she marry him after this? How
 can it possibly be permitted?' Oh, I know what you were thinking about!"
   "I didn't come here for that purpose, Parfen. That was not in my mind-"
   "That may be! Perhaps you didn't COME with the idea, but the idea is certainl
y there NOW! Ha, ha! well, that's enough! What are you upset about? Didn't you r
eally know it all before? You astonish me!"
   "All this is mere jealousy-it is some malady of yours, Parfen!
   You exaggerate everything," said the prince, excessively agitated. "What are 
you doing?"
   "Let go of it!" said Parfen, seizing from the prince's hand a knife which the
 latter had at that moment taken up from the table, where it lay beside the hist
ory. Parfen replaced it where it had been.
   "I seemed to know it-I felt it, when I was coming back to Petersburg," contin
ued the prince, "I did not want to come, I wished to forget all this, to uproot 
it from my memory altogether! Well, good-bye-what is the matter?"
   He had absently taken up the knife a second time, and again Rogojin snatched 
it from his hand, and threw it down on the table. It was a plainlooking knife, w
ith a bone handle, a blade about eight inches long, and broad in proportion, it 
did not clasp.
   Seeing that the prince was considerably struck by the fact that he had twice 
seized this knife out of his hand, Rogojin caught it up with some irritation, pu
t it inside the book, and threw the latter across to another table.
   "Do you cut your pages with it, or what?" asked Muishkin, still rather absent
ly, as though unable to throw off a deep preoccupation into which the conversati
on had thrown him.
   "Yes."
   "It's a garden knife, isn't it?"
   "Yes. Can't one cut pages with a garden knife?"
   "It's quite new."
   "Well, what of that? Can't I buy a new knife if I like?" shouted Rogojin furi
ously, his irritation growing with every word.
   The prince shuddered, and gazed fixedly at Parfen. Suddenly he burst out laug
hing.
   "Why, what an idea!" he said. "I didn't mean to ask you any of these question
s; I was thinking of something quite different! But my head is heavy, and I seem
 so absent-minded nowadays! Well, good-bye-I can't remember what I wanted to say
-good-bye!"
   "Not that way," said Rogojin.
   "There, I've forgotten that too!"
   "This way-come along-I'll show you."
      IV.
   THEY passed through the same rooms which the prince had traversed on his arri
val. In the largest there were pictures on the walls, portraits and landscapes o
f little interest. Over the door, however, there was one of strange and rather s
triking shape; it was six or seven feet in length, and not more than a foot in h
eight. It represented the Saviour just taken from the cross.
   The prince glanced at it, but took no further notice. He moved on hastily, as
 though anxious to get out of the house. But Rogojin suddenly stopped underneath
 the picture.
   "My father picked up all these pictures very cheap at auctions, and so on," h
e said; "they are all rubbish, except the one over the door, and that is valuabl
e. A man offered five hundred roubles for it last week."
   "Yes-that's a copy of a Holbein," said the prince, looking at it again, "and 
a good copy, too, so far as I am able to judge. I saw the picture abroad, and co
uld not forget it-what's the matter?"
   Rogojin had dropped the subject of the picture and walked on. Of course his s
trange frame of mind was sufficient to account for his conduct; but, still, it s
eemed queer to the prince that he should so abruptly drop a conversation commenc
ed by himself.
   Rogojin did not take any notice of his question.
   "Lef Nicolaievitch," said Rogojin, after a pause, during which the two walked
 along a little further, "I have long wished to ask you, do you believe in God?"
   "How strangely you speak, and how odd you look!" said the other, involuntaril
y.
   "I like looking at that picture," muttered Rogojin, not noticing, apparently,
 that the prince had not answered his question.
   "That picture! That picture!" cried Muishkin, struck by a sudden idea. "Why, 
a man's faith might be ruined by looking at that picture!"
   "So it is!" said Rogojin, unexpectedly. They had now reached the front door.
   The prince stopped.
   "How?" he said. "What do you mean? I was half joking, and you took me up quit
e seriously! Why do you ask me whether I believe in God "Oh, no particular reaso
n. I meant to ask you before-many people are unbelievers nowadays, especially Ru
ssians, I have been told.
   You ought to know-you've lived abroad."
   Rogojin laughed bitterly as he said these words, and opening the door, held i
t for the prince to pass out. Muishkin looked surprised, but went out. The other
 followed him as far as the landing of the outer stairs, and shut the door behin
d him. They both now stood facing one another, as though oblivious of where they
 were, or what they had to do next.
   "Well, good-bye!" said the prince, holding out his hand.
   "Good-bye," said Rogojin, pressing it hard, but quite mechanically.
   The prince made one step forward, and then turned round.
   "As to faith," he said, smiling, and evidently unwilling to leave Rogojin in 
this state-"as to faith, I had four curious conversations in two days, a week or
 so ago. One morning I met a man in the train, and made acquaintance with him at
 once. I had often heard of him as a very learned man, but an atheist; and I was
 very glad of the opportunity of conversing with so eminent and clever a person.
 He doesn't believe in God, and he talked a good deal about it, but all the whil
e it appeared to me that he was speaking OUTSIDE THE SUBJECT. And it has always 
struck me, both in speaking to such men and in reading their books, that they do
 not seem really to be touching on that at all, though on the surface they may a
ppear to do so. I told him this, but I dare say I did not clearly express what I
 meant, for he could not understand me.
   "That same evening I stopped at a small provincial hotel, and it so happened 
that a dreadful murder had been committed there the night before, and everybody 
was talking about it. Two peasants-elderly men and old friends-had had tea toget
her there the night before, and were to occupy the same bedroom. They were not d
runk but one of them had noticed for the first time that his friend possessed a 
silver watch which he was wearing on a chain. He was by no means a thief, and wa
s, as peasants go, a rich man; but this watch so fascinated him that he could no
t restrain himself.
   He took a knife, and when his friend turned his back, he came up softly behin
d, raised his eyes to heaven, crossed himself, and saying earnestly-'God forgive
 me, for Christ's sake!' he cut his friend's throat like a sheep, and took the w
atch."
   Rogojin roared with laughter. He laughed as though he were in a sort of fit. 
It was strange to see him laughing so after the sombre mood he had been in just 
before.
   "Oh, I like that! That beats anything!" he cried convulsively, panting for br
eath. "One is an absolute unbeliever; the other is such a thorough-going believe
r that he murders his friend to the tune of a prayer! Oh, prince, prince, that's
 too good for anything! You can't have invented it. It's the best thing I've hea
rd!"
   "Next morning I went out for a stroll through the town," continued the prince
, so soon as Rogojin was a little quieter, though his laughter still burst out a
t intervals, "and soon observed a drunken-looking soldier staggering about the p
avement.
   He came up to me and said, 'Buy my silver cross, sir! You shall have it for f
ourpence-it's real silver.' I looked, and there he held a cross, just taken off 
his own neck, evidently, a large tin one, made after the Byzantine pattern. I fi
shed out fourpence, and put his cross on my own neck, and I could see by his fac
e that he was as pleased as he could be at the thought that he had succeeded in 
cheating a foolish gentleman, and away he went to drink the value of his cross. 
At that time everything that I saw made a tremendous impression upon me. I had u
nderstood nothing about Russia before, and had only vague and fantastic memories
 of it. So I thought, 'I will wait awhile before I condemn this Judas. Only God 
knows what may be hidden in the hearts of drunkards.' "Well, I went homewards, a
nd near the hotel I came across a poor woman, carrying a child-a baby of some si
x weeks old. The mother was quite a girl herself. The baby was smiling up at her
, for the first time in its life, just at that moment; and while I watched the w
oman she suddenly crossed herself, oh, so devoutly! 'What is it, my good woman I
 asked her. (I was never but asking questions then!) Exactly as is a mother's jo
y when her baby smiles for the first time into her eyes, so is God's joy when on
e of His children turns and prays to Him for the first time, with all his heart!
' This is what that poor woman said to me, almost word for word; and such a deep
, refined, truly religious thought it was-a thought in which the whole essence o
f Christianity was expressed in one flash-that is, the recognition of God as our
 Father, and of God's joy in men as His own children, which is the chief idea of
 Christ. She was a simple country-woman-a mother, it's true-and perhaps, who kno
ws, she may have been the wife of the drunken soldier!
   "Listen, Parfen; you put a question to me just now. This is my reply. The ess
ence of religious feeling has nothing to do with reason, or atheism, or crime, o
r acts of any kind-it has nothing to do with these things-and never had. There i
s something besides all this, something which the arguments of the atheists can 
never touch. But the principal thing, and the conclusion of my argument, is that
 this is most clearly seen in the heart of a Russian. This is a conviction which
 I have gained while I have been in this Russia of ours. Yes, Parfen! there is w
ork to be done; there is work to be done in this Russian world! Remember what ta
lks we used to have in Moscow! And I never wished to come here at all; and I nev
er thought to meet you like this, Parfen!
   Well, well-good-bye-good-bye! God be with you!"
   He turned and went downstairs.
   "Lef Nicolaievitch!" cried Parfen, before he had reached the next landing. "H
ave you got that cross you bought from the soldier with you?"
   "Yes, I have," and the prince stopped again.
   "Show it me, will you?"
   A new fancy! The prince reflected, and then mounted the stairs once more. He 
pulled out the cross without taking it off his neck.
   "Give it to me," said Parfen.
   "Why? do you-"
   The prince would rather have kept this particular cross.
   "I'll wear it; and you shall have mine. I'll take it off at once."
   "You wish to exchange crosses? Very well, Parfen, if that's the case, I'm gla
d enough-that makes us brothers, you know."
   The prince took off his tin cross, Parfen his gold one, and the exchange was 
made.
   Parfen was silent. With sad surprise the prince observed that the look of dis
trust, the bitter, ironical smile, had still not altogether left his newly-adopt
ed brother's face. At moments, at all events, it showed itself but too plainly, 
At last Rogojin took the prince's hand, and stood so for some moments, as though
 he could not make up his mind. Then he drew him along, murmuring almost inaudib
ly,
   "Come!"
   They stopped on the landing, and rang the bell at a door opposite to Parfen's
 own lodging.
   An old woman opened to them and bowed low to Parfen, who asked her some quest
ions hurriedly, but did not wait to hear her answer. He led the prince on throug
h several dark, cold-looking rooms, spotlessly clean, with white covers over all
 the furniture.
   Without the ceremony of knocking, Parfen entered a small apartment, furnished
 like a drawing-room, but with a polished mahogany partition dividing one half o
f it from what was probably a bedroom. In one corner of this room sat an old wom
an in an armchair, close to the stove. She did not look very old, and her face w
as a pleasant, round one; but she was white-haired and, as one could detect at t
he first glance, quite in her second childhood. She wore a black woollen dress, 
with a black handkerchief round her neck and shoulders, and a white cap with bla
ck ribbons. Her feet were raised on a footstool. Beside her sat another old woma
n, also dressed in mourning, and silently knitting a stocking; this was evidentl
y a companion. They both looked as though they never broke the silence. The firs
t old woman, so soon as she saw Rogojin and the prince, smiled and bowed courteo
usly several times, in token of her gratification at their visit.
   "Mother," said Rogojin, kissing her hand, "here is my great friend, Prince Mu
ishkin; we have exchanged crosses; he was like a real brother to me at Moscow at
 one time, and did a great deal for me. Bless him, mother, as you would bless yo
ur own son. Wait a moment, let me arrange your hands for you."
   But the old lady, before Parfen had time to touch her, raised her right hand,
 and, with three fingers held up, devoutly made the sign of the cross three time
s over the prince. She then nodded her head kindly at him once more.
   "There, come along, Lef Nicolaievitch; that's all I brought you here for," sa
id Rogojin.
   When they reached the stairs again he added:
   "She understood nothing of what I said to her, and did not know what I wanted
 her to do, and yet she blessed you; that shows she wished to do so herself. Wel
l, goodbye; it's time you went, and I must go too."
   He opened his own door.
   "Well, let me at least embrace you and say goodbye, you strange fellow!" crie
d the prince, looking with gentle reproach at Rogojin, and advancing towards him
. But the latter had hardly raised his arms when he dropped them again. He could
 not make up his mind to it; he turned away from the prince in order to avoid lo
oking at him. He could not embrace him.
   "Don't be afraid," he muttered, indistinctly, "though I have taken your cross
, I shall not murder you for your watch." So saying, he laughed suddenly, and st
rangely. Then in a moment his face became transfigured; he grew deadly white, hi
s lips trembled, his eves burned like fire. He stretched out his arms and held t
he prince tightly to him, and said in a strangled voice:
   "Well, take her! It's Fate! She's yours. I surrender her
   Remember Rogojin!" And pushing the prince from him, without looking back at h
im, he hurriedly entered his own flat, and banged the door.
      V.
   IT was late now, nearly half-past two, and the prince did not find General Ep
anchin at home. He left a card, and determined to look up Colia, who had a room 
at a small hotel near. Colia was not in, but he was informed that he might be ba
ck shortly, and had left word that if he were not in by half-past three it was t
o be understood that he had gone to Pavlofsk to General Epanchin's, and would di
ne there. The prince decided to wait till half-past three, and ordered some dinn
er. At half-past three there was no sign of Colia. The prince waited until four 
o'clock, and then strolled off mechanically wherever his feet should carry him.
   In early summer there are often magnificent days in St.
   Petersburg-bright, hot and still. This happened to be such a day.
   For some time the prince wandered about without aim or object. He did not kno
w the town well. He stopped to look about him on bridges, at street corners. He 
entered a confectioner's shop to rest, once. He was in a state of nervous excite
ment and perturbation; he noticed nothing and no one; and he felt a craving for 
solitude, to be alone with his thoughts and his emotions, and to give himself up
 to them passively. He loathed the idea of trying to answer the questions that w
ould rise up in his heart and mind. "I am not to blame for all this," he thought
 to himself, half unconsciously.
   Towards six o'clock he found himself at the station of the Tsarsko-Selski rai
lway.
   He was tired of solitude now; a new rush of feeling took hold of him, and a f
lood of light chased away the gloom, for a moment, from his soul. He took a tick
et to Pavlofsk, and determined to get there as fast as he could, but something s
topped him; a reality, and not a fantasy, as he was inclined to think it. He was
 about to take his place in a carriage, when he suddenly threw away his ticket a
nd came out again, disturbed and thoughtful. A few moments later, in the street,
 he recalled something that had bothered him all the afternoon. He caught himsel
f engaged in a strange occupation which he now recollected he had taken up at od
d moments for the last few hours-it was looking about all around him for somethi
ng, he did not know what. He had forgotten it for a while, half an hour or so, a
nd now, suddenly, the uneasy search had recommenced.
   But he had hardly become conscious of this curious phenomenon, when another r
ecollection suddenly swam through his brain, interesting him for the moment, exc
eedingly. He remembered that the last time he had been engaged in looking around
 him for the unknown something, he was standing before a cutler's shop, in the w
indow of which were exposed certain goods for sale. He was extremely anxious now
 to discover whether this shop and these goods really existed, or whether the wh
ole thing had been a hallucination.
   He felt in a very curious condition today, a condition similar to that which 
had preceded his fits in bygone years.
   He remembered that at such times he had been particularly absentminded, and c
ould not discriminate between objects and persons unless he concentrated special
 attention upon them.
   He remembered seeing something in the window marked at sixty copecks. Therefo
re, if the shop existed and if this object were really in the window, it would p
rove that he had been able to concentrate his attention on this article at a mom
ent when, as a general rule, his absence of mind would have been too great to ad
mit of any such concentration; in fact, very shortly after he had left the railw
ay station in such a state of agitation.
   So he walked back looking about him for the shop, and his heart beat with int
olerable impatience. Ah! here was the very shop, and there was the article marke
d 60 cop." "Of course, it's sixty copecks," he thought, and certainly worth no m
ore." This idea amused him and he laughed.
   But it was a hysterical laugh; he was feeling terribly oppressed.
   He remembered clearly that just here, standing before this window, he had sud
denly turned round, just as earlier in the day he had turned and found the dread
ful eyes of Rogojin fixed upon him. Convinced, therefore, that in this respect a
t all events he had been under no delusion, he left the shop and went on.
   This must be thought out; it was clear that there had been no hallucination a
t the station then, either; something had actually happened to him, on both occa
sions; there was no doubt of it. But again a loathing for all mental exertion ov
ermastered him; he would not think it out now, he would put it off and think of 
something else. He remembered that during his epileptic fits, or rather immediat
ely preceding them, he had always experienced a moment or two when his whole hea
rt, and mind, and body seemed to wake up to vigour and light; when he became fil
led with joy and hope, and all his anxieties seemed to be swept away for ever; t
hese moments were but presentiments, as it were, of the one final second (it was
 never more than a second) in which the fit came upon him. That second, of cours
e, was inexpressible. When his attack was over, and the prince reflected on his 
symptoms, he used to say to himself: "These moments, short as they are, when I f
eel such extreme consciousness of myself, and consequently more of life than at 
other times, are due only to the disease-to the sudden rupture of normal conditi
ons. Therefore they are not really a higher kind of life, but a lower." This rea
soning, however, seemed to end in a paradox, and lead to the further considerati
on:-"What matter though it be only disease, an abnormal tension of the brain, if
 when I recall and analyze the moment, it seems to have been one of harmony and 
beauty in the highest degree-an instant of deepest sensation, overflowing with u
nbounded joy and rapture, ecstatic devotion, and completest life?" Vague though 
this sounds, it was perfectly comprehensible to Muishkin, though he knew that it
 was but a feeble expression of his sensations.
   That there was, indeed, beauty and harmony in those abnormal moments, that th
ey really contained the highest synthesis of life, he could not doubt, nor even 
admit the possibility of doubt. He felt that they were not analogous to the fant
astic and unreal dreams due to intoxication by hashish, opium or wine. Of that h
e could judge, when the attack was over. These instants were characterized-to de
fine it in a word-by an intense quickening of the sense of personality. Since, i
n the last conscious moment preceding the attack, he could say to himself, with 
full understanding of his words: "I would give my whole life for this one instan
t," then doubtless to him it really was worth a lifetime. For the rest, he thoug
ht the dialectical part of his argument of little worth; he saw only too clearly
 that the result of these ecstatic moments was stupefaction, mental darkness, id
iocy. No argument was possible on that point. His conclusion, his estimate of th
e "moment," doubtless contained some error, yet the reality of the sensation tro
ubled him. What's more unanswerable than a fact? And this fact had occurred. The
 prince had confessed unreservedly to himself that the feeling of intense beatit
ude in that crowded moment made the moment worth a lifetime. "I feel then," he s
aid one day to Rogojin in Moscow, "I feel then as if I understood those amazing 
words-'There shall be no more time.'"
   And he added with a smile: "No doubt the epileptic Mahomet refers to that sam
e moment when he says that he visited all the dwellings of Allah, in less time t
han was needed to empty his pitcher of water." Yes, he had often met Rogojin in 
Moscow, and many were the subjects they discussed. "He told me I had been a brot
her to him," thought the prince. "He said so today, for the first time."
   He was sitting in the Summer Garden on a seat under a tree, and his mind dwel
t on the matter. It was about seven o'clock, and the place was empty. The stifli
ng atmosphere foretold a storm, and the prince felt a certain charm in the conte
mplative mood which possessed him. He found pleasure, too, in gazing at the exte
rior objects around him. All the time he was trying to forget some thing, to esc
ape from some idea that haunted him; but melancholy thoughts came back, though h
e would so willingly have escaped from them. He remembered suddenly how he had b
een talking to the waiter, while he dined, about a recently committed murder whi
ch the whole town was discussing, and as he thought of it something strange came
 over him. He was seized all at once by a violent desire, almost a temptation, a
gainst which he strove in vain.
   He jumped up and walked off as fast as he could towards the "Petersburg Side.
" [One of the quarters of St. Petersburg.] He had asked someone, a little while 
before, to show him which was the Petersburg Side, on the banks of the Neva. He 
had not gone there, however; and he knew very well that it was of no use to go n
ow, for he would certainly not find Lebedeff's relation at home.
   He had the address, but she must certainly have gone to Pavlofsk, or Colia wo
uld have let him know. If he were to go now, it would merely be out of curiosity
, but a sudden, new idea had come into his head.
   However, it was something to move on and know where he was going.
   A minute later he was still moving on, but without knowing anything. He could
 no longer think out his new idea. He tried to take an interest in all he saw; i
n the sky, in the Neva. He spoke to some children he met. He felt his epileptic 
condition becoming more and more developed. The evening was very close; thunder 
was heard some way off.
   The prince was haunted all that day by the face of Lebedeff's nephew whom he 
had seen for the first time that morning, just as one is haunted at times by som
e persistent musical refrain. By a curious association of ideas, the young man a
lways appeared as the murderer of whom Lebedeff had spoken when introducing him 
to Muishkin. Yes, he had read something about the murder, and that quite recentl
y. Since he came to Russia, he had heard many stories of this kind, and was inte
rested in them. His conversation with the waiter, an hour ago, chanced to be on 
the subject of this murder of the Zemarins, and the latter had agreed with him a
bout it. He thought of the waiter again, and decided that he was no fool, but a 
steady, intelligent man: though, said he to himself, "God knows what he may real
ly be; in a country with which one is unfamiliar it is difficult to understand t
he people one meets." He was beginning to have a passionate faith in the Russian
 soul, however, and what discoveries he had made in the last six months, what un
expected discoveries! But every soul is a mystery, and depths of mystery lie in 
the soul of a Russian.
   He had been intimate with Rogojin, for example, and a brotherly friendship ha
d sprung up between them-yet did he really know him? What chaos and ugliness fil
ls the world at times! What a self-satisfied rascal is that nephew of Lebedeff's
! "But what am I thinking," continued the prince to himself. "Can he really have
 committed that crime? Did he kill those six persons? I seem to be confusing thi
ngs how strange it all is My head goes round And Lebedeff's daughter-how sympatheti
c and charming her face was as she held the child in her arms! What an innocent 
look and child-like laugh she had! It is curious that I had forgotten her until 
now. I expect Lebedeff adores her-and I really believe, when I think of it, that
 as sure as two and two make four, he is fond of that nephew, too!"
   Well, why should he judge them so hastily! Could he really say what they were
, after one short visit? Even Lebedeff seemed an enigma today. Did he expect to 
find him so? He had never seen him like that before. Lebedeff and the Comtesse d
u Barry! Good Heavens! If Rogojin should really kill someone, it would not, at a
ny rate, be such a senseless, chaotic affair. A knife made to a special pattern,
 and six people killed in a kind of delirium. But Rogojin also had a knife made 
to a special pattern. Can it be that Rogojin wishes to murder anyone? The prince
 began to tremble violently. "It is a crime on my part to imagine anything so ba
se, with such cynical frankness." His face reddened with shame at the thought; a
nd then there came across him as in a flash the memory of the incidents at the P
avlofsk station, and at the other station in the morning; and the question asked
 him by Rogojin about THE EYES and Rogojin's cross, that he was even now wearing
; and the benediction of Rogojin's mother; and his embrace on the darkened stair
case-that last supreme renunciation-and now, to find himself full of this new "i
dea," staring into shop-windows, and looking round for things-how base he was!
   Despair overmastered his soul; he would not go on, he would go back to his ho
tel; he even turned and went the other way; but a moment after he changed his mi
nd again and went on in the old direction.
   Why, here he was on the Petersburg Side already, quite close to the house! Wh
ere was his "idea"? He was marching along without it now. Yes, his malady was co
ming back, it was clear enough; all this gloom and heaviness, all these "ideas,"
 were nothing more nor less than a fit coming on; perhaps he would have a fit th
is very day.
   But just now all the gloom and darkness had fled, his heart felt full of joy 
and hope, there was no such thing as doubt. And yes, he hadn't seen her for so l
ong; he really must see her. He wished he could meet Rogojin; he would take his 
hand, and they would go to her together. His heart was pure, he was no rival of 
Parfen's.
   Tomorrow, he would go and tell him that he had seen her. Why, he had only com
e for the sole purpose of seeing her, all the way from Moscow! Perhaps she might
 be here still, who knows? She might not have gone away to Pavlofsk yet.
   Yes, all this must be put straight and above-board, there must be no more pas
sionate renouncements, such as Rogojin's. It must all be clear as day. Cannot Ro
gojin's soul bear the light? He said he did not love her with sympathy and pity;
 true, he added that "your pity is greater than my love," but he was not quite f
air on himself there. Kin! Rogojin reading a book-wasn't that sympathy beginning
? Did it not show that he comprehended his relations with her? And his story of 
waiting day and night for her forgiveness? That didn't look quite like passion a
lone.
   And as to her face, could it inspire nothing but passion? Could her face insp
ire passion at all now? Oh, it inspired suffering, grief, overwhelming grief of 
the soul! A poignant, agonizing memory swept over the prince's heart.
   Yes, agonizing. He remembered how he had suffered that first day when he thou
ght he observed in her the symptoms of madness. He had almost fallen into despai
r. How could he have lost his hold upon her when she ran away from him to Rogoji
n? He ought to have run after her himself, rather than wait for news as he had d
one.
   Can Rogojin have failed to observe, up to now, that she is mad?
   Rogojin attributes her strangeness to other causes, to passion!
   What insane jealousy! What was it he had hinted at in that suggestion of his?
 The prince suddenly blushed, and shuddered to his very heart.
   But why recall all this? There was insanity on both sides. For him, the princ
e, to love this woman with passion, was unthinkable. It would be cruel and inhum
an. Yes. Rogojin is not fair to himself; he has a large heart; he has aptitude f
or sympathy. When he learns the truth, and finds what a pitiable being is this i
njured, broken, half-insane creature, he will forgive her all the torment she ha
s caused him. He will become her slave, her brother, her friend. Compassion will
 teach even Rogojin, it will show him how to reason. Compassion is the chief law
 of human existence. Oh, how guilty he felt towards Rogojin!
   And, for a few warm, hasty words spoken in Moscow, Parfen had called him "bro
ther," while he-but no, this was delirium! It would all come right! That gloomy 
Parfen had implied that his faith was waning; he must suffer dreadfully. He said
 he liked to look at that picture; it was not that he liked it, but he felt the 
need of looking at it. Rogojin was not merely a passionate soul; he was a fighte
r. He was fighting for the restoration of his dying faith. He must have somethin
g to hold on to and believe, and someone to believe in. What a strange picture t
hat of Holbein's is! Why, this is the street, and here's the house, No. 16.
   The prince rang the bell, and asked for Nastasia Philipovna. The lady of the 
house came out, and stated that Nastasia had gone to stay with Daria Alexeyevna 
at Pavlofsk, and might be there some days.
   Madame Filisoff was a little woman of forty, with a cunning face, and crafty,
 piercing eyes. When, with an air of mystery, she asked her visitor's name, he r
efused at first to answer, but in a moment he changed his mind, and left strict 
instructions that it should be given to Nastasia Philipovna. The urgency of his 
request seemed to impress Madame Filisoff, and she put on a knowing expression, 
as if to say, "You need not be afraid, I quite understand." The prince's name ev
idently was a great surprise to her. He stood and looked absently at her for a m
oment, then turned, and took the road back to his hotel. But he went away not as
 he came. A great change had suddenly come over him. He went blindly forward; hi
s knees shook under him; he was tormented by "ideas"; his lips were blue, and tr
embled with a feeble, meaningless smile. His demon was upon him once more.
   What had happened to him? Why was his brow clammy with drops of moisture, his
 knees shaking beneath him, and his soul oppressed with a cold gloom? Was it bec
ause he had just seen these dreadful eyes again? Why, he had left the Summer Gar
den on purpose to see them; that had been his "idea." He had wished to assure hi
mself that he would see them once more at that house. Then why was he so overwhe
lmed now, having seen them as he expected? just as though he had not expected to
 see them! Yes, they were the very same eyes; and no doubt about it. The same th
at he had seen in the crowd that morning at the station, the same that he had su
rprised in Rogojin's rooms some hours later, when the latter had replied to his 
inquiry with a sneering laugh, "Well, whose eyes were they?" Then for the third 
time they had appeared just as he was getting into the train on his way to see A
glaya. He had had a strong impulse to rush up to Rogojin, and repeat his words o
f the morning "Whose eyes are they?" Instead he had fled from the station, and k
new nothing more, until he found himself gazing into the window of a cutler's sh
op, and wondering if a knife with a staghorn handle would cost more than sixty c
opecks. And as the prince sat dreaming in the Summer Garden under a lime-tree, a
 wicked demon had come and whispered in his car: "Rogojin has been spying upon y
ou and watching you all the morning in a frenzy of desperation. When he finds yo
u have not gone to Pavlofsk-a terrible discovery for him-he will surely go at on
ce to that house in Petersburg Side, and watch for you there, although only this
 morning you gave your word of honour not to see HER, and swore that you had not
 come to Petersburg for that purpose." And thereupon the prince had hastened off
 to that house, and what was there in the fact that he had met Rogojin there? He
 had only seen a wretched, suffering creature, whose state of mind was gloomy an
d miserable, but most comprehensible. In the morning Rogojin had seemed to be tr
ying to keep out of the way; but at the station this afternoon he had stood out,
 he had concealed himself, indeed, less than the prince himself; at the house, n
ow, he had stood fifty yards off on the other side of the road, with folded hand
s, watching, plainly in view and apparently desirous of being seen. He had stood
 there like an accuser, like a judge, not like a-a what?
   And why had not the prince approached him and spoken to him, instead of turni
ng away and pretending he had seen nothing, although their eyes met? (Yes, their
 eyes had met, and they had looked at each other.) Why, he had himself wished to
 take Rogojin by the hand and go in together, he had himself determined to go to
 him on the morrow and tell him that he had seen her, he had repudiated the demo
n as he walked to the house, and his heart had been full of joy.
   Was there something in the whole aspect of the man, today, sufficient to just
ify the prince's terror, and the awful suspicions of his demon? Something seen, 
but indescribable, which filled him with dreadful presentiments? Yes, he was con
vinced of it-convinced of what? (Oh, how mean and hideous of him to feel this co
nviction, this presentiment! How he blamed himself for it!) "Speak if you dare, 
and tell me, what is the presentiment?" he repeated to himself, over and over ag
ain. "Put it into words, speak out clearly and distinctly. Oh, miserable coward 
that I am!" The prince flushed with shame for his own baseness. "How shall I eve
r look this man in the face again? My God, what a day!
   And what a nightmare, what a nightmare!"
   There was a moment, during this long, wretched walk back from the Petersburg 
Side, when the prince felt an irresistible desire to go straight to Rogojin's, w
ait for him, embrace him with tears of shame and contrition, and tell him of his
 distrust, and finish with it-once for all.
   But here he was back at his hotel.
   How often during the day he had thought of this hotel with loathing-its corri
dor, its rooms, its stairs. How he had dreaded coming back to it, for some reaso
n.
   "What a regular old woman I am today," he had said to himself each time, with
 annoyance. "I believe in every foolish presentiment that comes into my head."
   He stopped for a moment at the door; a great flush of shame came over him. "I
 am a coward, a wretched coward," he said, and moved forward again; but once mor
e he paused.
   Among all the incidents of the day, one recurred to his mind to the exclusion
 of the rest; although now that his self-control was regained, and he was no lon
ger under the influence of a nightmare, he was able to think of it calmly. It co
ncerned the knife on Rogojin's table. "Why should not Rogojin have as many knive
s on his table as he chooses?" thought the prince, wondering at his suspicions, 
as he had done when he found himself looking into the cutler's window. "What cou
ld it have to do with me?" he said to himself again, and stopped as if rooted to
 the ground by a kind of paralysis of limb such as attacks people under the stre
ss of some humiliating recollection.
   The doorway was dark and gloomy at any time; but just at this moment it was r
endered doubly so by the fact that the thunderstorm had just broken, and the rai
n was coming down in torrents.
   And in the semi-darkness the prince distinguished a man standing close to the
 stairs, apparently waiting.
   There was nothing particularly significant in the fact that a man was standin
g back in the doorway, waiting to come out or go upstairs; but the prince felt a
n irresistible conviction that he knew this man, and that it was Rogojin. The ma
n moved on up the stairs; a moment later the prince passed up them, too. His hea
rt froze within him. "In a minute or two I shall know all," he thought.
   The staircase led to the first and second corridors of the hotel, along which
 lay the guests' bedrooms. As is often the case in Petersburg houses, it was nar
row and very dark, and turned around a massive stone column.
   On the first landing, which was as small as the necessary turn of the stairs 
allowed, there was a niche in the column, about half a yard wide, and in this ni
che the prince felt convinced that a man stood concealed. He thought he could di
stinguish a figure standing there. He would pass by quickly and not look. He too
k a step forward, but could bear the uncertainty no longer and turned his head.
   The eyes-the same two eyes-met his! The man concealed in the niche had also t
aken a step forward. For one second they stood face to face.
   Suddenly the prince caught the man by the shoulder and twisted him round towa
rds the light, so that he might see his face more clearly.
   Rogojin's eyes flashed, and a smile of insanity distorted his countenance. Hi
s right hand was raised, and something glittered in it. The prince did not think
 of trying to stop it. All he could remember afterwards was that he seemed to ha
ve called out:
   "Parfen! I won't believe it."
   Next moment something appeared to burst open before him: a wonderful inner li
ght illuminated his soul. This lasted perhaps half a second, yet he distinctly r
emembered hearing the beginning of the wail, the strange, dreadful wail, which b
urst from his lips of its own accord, and which no effort of will on his part co
uld suppress.
   Next moment he was absolutely unconscious; black darkness blotted out everyth
ing.
   He had fallen in an epileptic fit. .
   As is well known, these fits occur instantaneously. The face, especially the 
eyes, become terribly disfigured, convulsions seize the limbs, a terrible cry br
eaks from the sufferer, a wail from which everything human seems to be blotted o
ut, so that it is impossible to believe that the man who has just fallen is the 
same who emitted the dreadful cry. It seems more as though some other being, ins
ide the stricken one, had cried. Many people have borne witness to this impressi
on; and many cannot behold an epileptic fit without a feeling of mysterious terr
or and dread.
   Such a feeling, we must suppose, overtook Rogojin at this moment, and saved t
he prince's life. Not knowing that it was a fit, and seeing his victim disappear
 head foremost into the darkness, hearing his head strike the stone steps below 
with a crash, Rogojin rushed downstairs, skirting the body, and flung himself he
adlong out of the hotel, like a raving madman.
   The prince's body slipped convulsively down the steps till it rested at the b
ottom. Very soon, in five minutes or so, he was discovered, and a crowd collecte
d around him.
   A pool of blood on the steps near his head gave rise to grave fears. Was it a
 case of accident, or had there been a crime? It was, however, soon recognized a
s a case of epilepsy, and identification and proper measures for restoration fol
lowed one another, owing to a fortunate circumstance. Colia Ivolgin had come bac
k to his hotel about seven o'clock, owing to a sudden impulse which made him ref
use to dine at the Epanchins', and, finding a note from the prince awaiting him,
 had sped away to the latter's address. Arrived there, he ordered a cup of tea a
nd sat sipping it in the coffee-room. While there he heard excited whispers of s
omeone just found at the bottom of the stairs in a fit; upon which he had hurrie
d to the spot, with a presentiment of evil, and at once recognized the prince.
   The sufferer was immediately taken to his room, and though he partially regai
ned consciousness, he lay long in a semi-dazed condition.
   The doctor stated that there was no danger to be apprehended from the wound o
n the head, and as soon as the prince could understand what was going on around 
him, Colia hired a carriage and took him away to Lebedeff's. There he was receiv
ed with much cordiality, and the departure to the country was hastened on his ac
count.
   Three days later they were all at Pavlofsk.
      VI.
   LEBEDEFF'S country-house was not large, but it was pretty and convenient, esp
ecially the part which was let to the prince.
   A row of orange and lemon trees and jasmines, planted in green tubs, stood on
 the fairly wide terrace. According to Lebedeff, these trees gave the house a mo
st delightful aspect. Some were there when he bought it, and he was so charmed w
ith the effect that he promptly added to their number. When the tubs containing 
these plants arrived at the villa and were set in their places, Lebedeff kept ru
nning into the street to enjoy the view of the house, and every time he did so t
he rent to be demanded from the future tenant went up with a bound.
   This country villa pleased the prince very much in his state of physical and 
mental exhaustion. On the day that they left for Pavlofsk, that is the day after
 his attack, he appeared almost well, though in reality he felt very far from it
. The faces of those around him for the last three days had made a pleasant impr
ession. He was pleased to see, not only Colia, who had become his inseparable co
mpanion, but Lebedeff himself and all the family, except the nephew, who had lef
t the house. He was also glad to receive a visit from General Ivolgin, before le
aving St.
   Petersburg.
   It was getting late when the party arrived at Pavlofsk, but several people ca
lled to see the prince, and assembled in the verandah. Gania was the first to ar
rive. He had grown so pale and thin that the prince could hardly recognize him. 
Then came Varia and Ptitsin, who were rusticating in the neighbourhood. As to Ge
neral Ivolgin, he scarcely budged from Lebedeff's house, and seemed to have move
d to Pavlofsk with him. Lebedeff did his best to keep Ardalion Alexandrovitch by
 him, and to prevent him from invading the prince's quarters. He chatted with hi
m confidentially, so that they might have been taken for old friends. During tho
se three days the prince had noticed that they frequently held long conversation
s; he often heard their voices raised in argument on deep and learned subjects, 
which evidently pleased Lebedeff. He seemed as if he could not do without the ge
neral. But it was not only Ardalion Alexandrovitch whom Lebedeff kept out of the
 prince's way. Since they had come to the villa, he treated his own family the s
ame. Upon the pretext that his tenant needed quiet, he kept him almost in isolat
ion, and Muishkin protested in vain against this excess of zeal. Lebedeff stampe
d his feet at his daughters and drove them away if they attempted to join the pr
ince on the terrace; not even Vera was excepted.
   "They will lose all respect if they are allowed to be so free and easy; besid
es it is not proper for them," he declared at last, in answer to a direct questi
on from the prince.
   "Why on earth not?" asked the latter. "Really, you know, you are making yours
elf a nuisance, by keeping guard over me like this. I get bored all by myself; I
 have told you so over and over again, and you get on my nerves more than ever b
y waving your hands and creeping in and out in the mysterious way you do."
   It was a fact that Lebedeff, though he was so anxious to keep everyone else f
rom disturbing the patient, was continually in and out of the prince's room hims
elf. He invariably began by opening the door a crack and peering in to see if th
e prince was there, or if he had escaped; then he would creep softly up to the a
rmchair, sometimes making Muishkin jump by his sudden appearance.
   He always asked if the patient wanted anything, and when the latter replied t
hat he only wanted to be left in peace, he would turn away obediently and make f
or the door on tip-toe, with deprecatory gestures to imply that he had only just
 looked in, that he would not speak a word, and would go away and not intrude ag
ain; which did not prevent him from reappearing in ten minutes or a quarter of a
n hour. Colia had free access to the prince, at which Lebedeff was quite disgust
ed and indignant. He would listen at the door for half an hour at a time while t
he two were talking. Colia found this out, and naturally told the prince of his 
discovery.
   "Do you think yourself my master, that you try to keep me under lock and key 
like this?" said the prince to Lebedeff. "In the country, at least, I intend to 
be free, and you may make up your mind that I mean to see whom I like, and go wh
ere I please."
   "Why, of course," replied the clerk, gesticulating with his hands.
   The prince looked him sternly up and down.
   "Well, Lukian Timofeyovitch, have you brought the little cupboard that you ha
d at the head of your bed with you here?"
   "No, I left it where it was."
   "Impossible!"
   "It cannot be moved; you would have to pull the wall down, it is so firmly fi
xed."
   "Perhaps you have one like it here?"
   "I have one that is even better, much better; that is really why I bought thi
s house."
   "Ah! What visitor did you turn away from my door, about an hour ago?"
   "The-the general. I would not let him in; there is no need for him to visit y
ou, prince I have the deepest esteem for him, he is a-a great man. You don't beli
eve it? Well, you will see, and yet, most excellent prince, you had much better 
not receive him."
   "May I ask why? and also why you walk about on tiptoe and always seem as if y
ou were going to whisper a secret in my ear whenever you come near me?"
   "I am vile, vile; I know it!" cried Lebedeff, beating his breast with a contr
ite air. "But will not the general be too hospitable for you?"
   "Too hospitable?"
   "Yes. First, he proposes to come and live in my house. Well and good; but he 
sticks at nothing; he immediately makes himself one of the family. We have talke
d over our respective relations several times, and discovered that we are connec
ted by marriage.
   It seems also that you are a sort of nephew on his mother's side; he was expl
aining it to me again only yesterday. If you are his nephew, it follows that I m
ust also be a relation of yours, most excellent prince. Never mind about that, i
t is only a foible; but just now he assured me that all his life, from the day h
e was made an ensign to the 11th of last June, he has entertained at least two h
undred guests at his table every day. Finally, he went so far as to say that the
y never rose from the table; they dined, supped, and had tea, for fifteen hours 
at a stretch. This went on for thirty years without a break; there was barely ti
me to change the table-cloth; directly one person left, another took his place. 
On feast-days he entertained as many as three hundred guests, and they numbered 
seven hundred on the thousandth anniversary of the foundation of the Russian Emp
ire. It amounts to a passion with him; it makes one uneasy to hear of it. It is 
terrible to have to entertain people who do things on such a scale. That is why 
I wonder whether such a man is not too hospitable for you and me."
   "But you seem to be on the best of terms with him?"
   "Quite fraternal-I look upon it as a joke. Let us be brothersin-law, it is al
l the same to me,-rather an honour than not. But in spite of the two hundred gue
sts and the thousandth anniversary of the Russian Empire, I can see that he is a
 very remarkable man. I am quite sincere. You said just now that I always looked
 as if I was going to tell you a secret; you are right. I have a secret to tell 
you: a certain person has just let me know that she is very anxious for a secret
 interview with you."
   "Why should it be secret? Not at all; I will call on her myself tomorrow."
   "No, oh no!" cried Lebedeff, waving his arms; "if she is afraid, it is not fo
r the reason you think. By the way, do you know that the monster comes every day
 to inquire after your health?"
   "You call him a monster so often that it makes me suspicious."
   "You must have no suspicions, none whatever," said Lebedeff quickly. "I only 
want you to know that the person in question is not afraid of him, but of someth
ing quite, quite different."
   "What on earth is she afraid of, then? Tell me plainly, without any more beat
ing about the bush," said the prince, exasperated by the other's mysterious grim
aces.
   "Ah that is the secret," said Lebedeff, with a smile.
   "Whose secret?"
   "Yours. You forbade me yourself to mention it before you, most excellent prin
ce," murmured Lebedeff. Then, satisfied that he had worked up Muishkin's curiosi
ty to the highest pitch, he added abruptly: "She is afraid of Aglaya Ivanovna."
   The prince frowned for a moment in silence, and then said suddenly:
   "Really, Lebedeff, I must leave your house. Where are Gavrila Ardalionovitch 
and the Ptitsins? Are they here? Have you chased them away, too?"
   "They are coming, they are coming; and the general as well. I will open all t
he doors; I will call all my daughters, all of them, this very minute," said Leb
edeff in a low voice, thoroughly frightened, and waving his hands as he ran from
 door to door.
   At that moment Colia appeared on the terrace; he announced that Lizabetha Pro
kofievna and her three daughters were close behind him.
   Moved by this news, Lebedeff hurried up to the prince.
   "Shall I call the Ptitsins, and Gavrila Ardalionovitch? Shall I let the gener
al in?" he asked.
   "Why not? Let in anyone who wants to see me. I assure you, Lebedeff, you have
 misunderstood my position from the very first; you have been wrong all along. I
 have not the slightest reason to hide myself from anyone," replied the prince g
aily.
   Seeing him laugh, Lebedeff thought fit to laugh also, and though much agitate
d his satisfaction was quite visible.
   Colia was right; the Epanchin ladies were only a few steps behind him. As the
y approached the terrace other visitors appeared from Lebedeff's side of the hou
se-the Ptitsins, Gania, and Ardalion Alexandrovitch.
   The Epanchins had only just heard of the prince's illness and of his presence
 in Pavlofsk, from Colia; and up to this time had been in a state of considerabl
e bewilderment about him. The general brought the prince's card down from town, 
and Mrs.
   Epanchin had felt convinced that he himself would follow his card at once; sh
e was much excited.
   In vain the girls assured her that a man who had not written for six months w
ould not be in such a dreadful hurry, and that probably he had enough to do in t
own without needing to bustle down to Pavlofsk to see them. Their mother was qui
te angry at the very idea of such a thing, and announced her absolute conviction
 that he would turn up the next day at latest.
   So next day the prince was expected all the morning, and at dinner, tea, and 
supper; and when he did not appear in the evening, Mrs. Epanchin quarrelled with
 everyone in the house, finding plenty of pretexts without so much as mentioning
 the prince's name.
   On the third day there was no talk of him at all, until Aglaya remarked at di
nner: "Mamma is cross because the prince hasn't turned up," to which the general
 replied that it was not his fault.
   Mrs. Epanchin misunderstood the observation, and rising from her place she le
ft the room in majestic wrath. In the evening, however, Colia came with the stor
y of the prince's adventures, so far as he knew them. Mrs. Epanchin was triumpha
nt; although Colia had to listen to a long lecture. "He idles about here the who
le day long, one can't get rid of him; and then when he is wanted he does not co
me. He might have sent a line if he did not wish to inconvenience himself."
   At the words "one can't get rid of him," Colia was very angry, and nearly fle
w into a rage; but he resolved to be quiet for the time and show his resentment 
later. If the words had been less offensive he might have forgiven them, so plea
sed was he to see Lizabetha Prokofievna worried and anxious about the prince's i
llness.
   She would have insisted on sending to Petersburg at once, for a certain great
 medical celebrity; but her daughters dissuaded her, though they were not willin
g to stay behind when she at once prepared to go and visit the invalid. Aglaya, 
however, suggested that it was a little unceremonious to go en masse to see him.
   "Very well then, stay at home," said Mrs. Epanchin, and a good thing too, for
 Evgenie Pavlovitch is coming down and there will be no one at home to receive h
im."
   Of course, after this, Aglaya went with the rest. In fact, she had never had 
the slightest intention of doing otherwise.
   Prince S., who was in the house, was requested to escort the ladies. He had b
een much interested when he first heard of the prince from the Epanchins. It app
eared that they had known one another before, and had spent some time together i
n a little provincial town three months ago. Prince S. had greatly taken to him,
 and was delighted with the opportunity of meeting him again, The general had no
t come down from town as yet, nor had Evgenie Pavlovitch arrived.
   It was not more than two or three hundred yards from the Epanchins' house to 
Lebedeff's. The first disagreeable impression experienced by Mrs. Epanchin was t
o find the prince surrounded by a whole assembly of other guests-not to mention 
the fact that some of those present were particularly detestable in her eyes.
   The next annoying circumstance was when an apparently strong and healthy youn
g fellow, well dressed, and smiling, came forward to meet her on the terrace, in
stead of the half-dying unfortunate whom she had expected to see.
   She was astonished and vexed, and her disappointment pleased Colia immensely.
 Of course he could have undeceived her before she started, but the mischievous 
boy had been careful not to do that, foreseeing the probably laughable disgust t
hat she would experience when she found her dear friend, the prince, in good hea
lth. Colia was indelicate enough to voice the delight he felt at his success in 
managing to annoy Lizabetha Prokofievna, with whom, in spite of their really ami
cable relations, he was constantly sparring.
   "Just wait a while, my boy!" said she; "don't be too certain of your triumph.
" And she sat down heavily, in the arm-chair pushed forward by the prince.
   Lebedeff, Ptitsin, and General Ivolgin hastened to find chairs for the young 
ladies. Varia greeted them joyfully, and they exchanged confidences in ecstatic 
whispers.
   "I must admit, prince, I was a little put out to see you up and about like th
is-I expected to find you in bed; but I give you my word, I was only annoyed for
 an instant, before I collected my thoughts properly. I am always wiser on secon
d thoughts, and I dare say you are the same. I assure you I am as glad to see yo
u well as though you were my own son,-yes, and more; and if you don't believe me
 the more shame to you, and it's not my fault.
   But that spiteful boy delights in playing all sorts of tricks.
   You are his patron, it seems. Well, I warn you that one fine morning I shall 
deprive myself of the pleasure of his further acquaintance."
   "What have I done wrong now?" cried Colia. "What was the good of telling you 
that the prince was nearly well again? You would not have believed me; it was so
 much more interesting to picture him on his death-bed."
   "How long do you remain here, prince?" asked Madame Epanchin.
   "All the summer, and perhaps longer."
   "You are alone, aren't you,-not married?"
   "No, I'm not married!" replied the prince, smiling at the ingenuousness of th
is little feeler.
   "Oh, you needn't laugh! These things do happen, you know! Now then-why didn't
 you come to us? We have a wing quite empty. But just as you like, of course. Do
 you lease it from HIM?-this fellow, I mean," she added, nodding towards Lebedef
f. "And why does he always wriggle so?"
   At that moment Vera, carrying the baby in her arms as usual, came out of the 
house, on to the terrace. Lebedeff kept fidgeting among the chairs, and did not 
seem to know what to do with himself, though he had no intention of going away. 
He no sooner caught sight of his daughter, than he rushed in her direction, wavi
ng his arms to keep her away; he even forgot himself so far as to stamp his foot
.
   "Is he mad?" asked Madame Epanchin suddenly.
   "No, he"
   "Perhaps he is drunk? Your company is rather peculiar," she added, with a gla
nce at the other guests
   "But what a pretty girl! Who is she?"
   "That is Lebedeff's daughter-Vera Lukianovna."
   "Indeed? She looks very sweet. I should like to make her acquaintance."
   The words were hardly out of her mouth, when Lebedeff dragged Vera forward, i
n order to present her.
   "Orphans, poor orphans!" he began in a pathetic voice.
   "The child she carries is an orphan, too. She is Vera's sister, my daughter L
uboff. The day this babe was born, six weeks ago, my wife died, by the will of G
od Almighty Yes Vera takes her mother's place, though she is but her sister nothing
 more nothing more"
   "And you! You are nothing more than a fool, if you'll excuse me!
   Well! well! you know that yourself, I expect," said the lady indignantly.
   Lebedeff bowed low. "It is the truth," he replied, with extreme respect.
   "Oh, Mr. Lebedeff, I am told you lecture on the Apocalypse. Is it true?" aske
d Aglaya.
   "Yes, that is so for the last fifteen years."
   "I have heard of you, and I think read of you in the newspapers."
   "No, that was another commentator, whom the papers named. He is dead, however
, and I have taken his place," said the other, much delighted.
   "We are neighbours, so will you be so kind as to come over one day and explai
n the Apocalypse to me?" said Aglaya. "I do not understand it in the least."
   "Allow me to warn you," interposed General Ivolgin, that he is the greatest c
harlatan on earth." He had taken the chair next to the girl, and was impatient t
o begin talking. "No doubt there are pleasures and amusements peculiar to the co
untry," he continued,
   "and to listen to a pretended student holding forth on the book of the Revela
tions may be as good as any other. It may even be original. But you seem to be lo
oking at me with some surprise-may I introduce myself-General Ivolgin-I carried 
you in my arms as a baby-"
   "Delighted, I'm sure," said Aglaya; "I am acquainted with Varvara Ardalionovn
a and Nina Alexandrovna." She was trying hard to restrain herself from laughing.
   Mrs. Epanchin flushed up; some accumulation of spleen in her suddenly needed 
an outlet. She could not bear this General Ivolgin whom she had once known, long
 ago-in society.
   "You are deviating from the truth, sir, as usual!" she remarked, boiling over
 with indignation; "you never carried her in your life!"
   "You have forgotten, mother," said Aglaya, suddenly. "He really did carry me 
about,-in Tver, you know. I was six years old, I remember. He made me a bow and 
arrow, and I shot a pigeon. Don't you remember shooting a pigeon, you and I, one
 day?"
   "Yes, and he made me a cardboard helmet, and a little wooden sword-I remember
!" said Adelaida.
   "Yes, I remember too!" said Alexandra. "You quarrelled about the wounded pige
on, and Adelaida was put in the corner, and stood there with her helmet and swor
d and all."
   The poor general had merely made the remark about having carried Aglaya in hi
s arms because he always did so begin a conversation with young people. But it h
appened that this time he had really hit upon the truth, though he had himself e
ntirely forgotten the fact. But when Adelaida and Aglaya recalled the episode of
 the pigeon, his mind became filled with memories, and it is impossible to descr
ibe how this poor old man, usually half drunk, was moved by the recollection.
   "I remember-I remember it all!" he cried. "I was captain then.
   You were such a lovely little thing-Nina Alexandrovna!-Gania, listen! I was r
eceived then by General Epanchin."
   "Yes, and look what you have come to now!" interrupted Mrs.
   Epanchin. "However, I see you have not quite drunk your better feelings away.
 But you've broken your wife's heart, sir-and instead of looking after your chil
dren, you have spent your time in public-houses and debtors' prisons! Go away, m
y friend, stand in some corner and weep, and bemoan your fallen dignity, and per
haps God will forgive you yet! Go, go! I'm serious! There's nothing so favourabl
e for repentance as to think of the past with feelings of remorse!"
   There was no need to repeat that she was serious. The general, like all drunk
ards, was extremely emotional and easily touched by recollections of his better 
days. He rose and walked quietly to the door, so meekly that Mrs. Epanchin was i
nstantly sorry for him.
   "Ardalion Alexandrovitch," she cried after him, "wait a moment, we are all si
nners! When you feel that your conscience reproaches you a little less, come ove
r to me and we'll have a talk about the past! I dare say I am fifty times more o
f a sinner than you are! And now go, go, good-bye, you had better not stay here!
" she added, in alarm, as he turned as though to come back.
   "Don't go after him just now, Colia, or he'll be vexed, and the benefit of th
is moment will be lost!" said the prince, as the boy was hurrying out of the roo
m.
   "Quite true! Much better to go in half an hour or so said Mrs.
   Epanchin.
   "That's what comes of telling the truth for once in one's life!" said Lebedef
f. "It reduced him to tears."
   "Come, come! the less YOU say about it the better-to judge from all I have he
ard about you!" replied Mrs. Epanchin.
   The prince took the first opportunity of informing the Epanchin ladies that h
e had intended to pay them a visit that day, if they had not themselves come thi
s afternoon, and Lizabetha Prokofievna replied that she hoped he would still do 
so.
   By this time some of the visitors had disappeared.
   Ptitsin had tactfully retreated to Lebedeff's wing; and Gania soon followed h
im.
   The latter had behaved modestly, but with dignity, on this occasion of his fi
rst meeting with the Epanchins since the rupture. Twice Mrs. Epanchin had delibe
rately examined him from head to foot; but he had stood fire without flinching. 
He was certainly much changed, as anyone could see who had not met him for some 
time; and this fact seemed to afford Aglaya a good deal of satisfaction.
   "That was Gavrila Ardalionovitch, who just went out, wasn't it?" she asked su
ddenly, interrupting somebody else's conversation to make the remark.
   "Yes, it was," said the prince.
   "I hardly knew him; he is much changed, and for the better!"
   "I am very glad," said the prince.
   "He has been very ill," added Varia.
   "How has he changed for the better?" asked Mrs. Epanchin. "I don't see any ch
ange for the better! What's better in him? Where did you get THAT idea from? WHA
T'S better?"
   "There's nothing better than the 'poor knight'!" said Colia, who was standing
 near the last speaker's chair.
   "I quite agree with you there!" said Prince S., laughing.
   "So do I," said Adelaida, solemnly.
   "WHAT poor knight?" asked Mrs. Epanchin, looking round at the face of each of
 the speakers in turn. Seeing, however, that Aglaya was blushing, she added, ang
rily:
   "What nonsense you are all talking! What do you mean by poor knight?"
   "It's not the first time this urchin, your favourite, has shown his impudence
 by twisting other people's words," said Aglaya, haughtily.
   Every time that Aglaya showed temper (and this was very often), there was so 
much childish pouting, such "school-girlishness," as it were, in her apparent wr
ath, that it was impossible to avoid smiling at her, to her own unutterable indi
gnation. On these occasions she would say, "How can they, how DARE they laugh at
 me?"
   This time everyone laughed at her, her sisters, Prince S., Prince Muishkin (t
hough he himself had flushed for some reason), and Colia. Aglaya was dreadfully 
indignant, and looked twice as pretty in her wrath.
   "He's always twisting round what one says," she cried.
   "I am only repeating your own exclamation!" said Colia. "A month ago you were
 turning over the pages of your Don Quixote, and suddenly called out 'there is n
othing better than the poor knight.' I don't know whom you were referring to, of
 course, whether to Don Quixote, or Evgenie Pavlovitch, or someone else, but you
 certainly said these words, and afterwards there was a long conversation "
   "You are inclined to go a little too far, my good boy, with your guesses," sa
id Mrs. Epanchin, with some show of annoyance.
   "But it's not I alone," cried Colia. "They all talked about it, and they do s
till. Why, just now Prince S. and Adelaida Ivanovna declared that they upheld 't
he poor knight'; so evidently there does exist a 'poor knight'; and if it were n
ot for Adelaida Ivanovna, we should have known long ago who the 'poor knight' wa
s."
   "Why, how am I to blame?" asked Adelaida, smiling.
   "You wouldn't draw his portrait for us, that's why you are to blame! Aglaya I
vanovna asked you to draw his portrait, and gave you the whole subject of the pi
cture. She invented it herself; and you wouldn't."
   "What was I to draw? According to the lines she quoted:
   "'From his face he never lifted
   That eternal mask of steel.'"
   "What sort of a face was I to draw? I couldn't draw a mask."
   "I don't know what you are driving at; what mask do you mean?" said Mrs. Epan
chin, irritably. She began to see pretty clearly though what it meant, and whom 
they referred to by the generally accepted title of "poor knight." But what spec
ially annoyed her was that the prince was looking so uncomfortable, and blushing
 like a ten-year-old child.
   "Well, have you finished your silly joke?" she added, and am I to be told wha
t this 'poor knight' means, or is it a solemn secret which cannot be approached 
lightly?"
   But they all laughed on.
   "It's simply that there is a Russian poem," began Prince S., evidently anxiou
s to change the conversation, "a strange thing, without beginning or end, and al
l about a 'poor knight.' A month or so ago, we were all talking and laughing, an
d looking up a subject for one of Adelaida's pictures-you know it is the princip
al business of this family to find subjects for Adelaida's pictures. Well, we ha
ppened upon this 'poor knight.' I don't remember who thought of it first-"
   "Oh! Aglaya Ivanovna did," said Colia.
   "Very likely-I don't recollect," continued Prince S.
   "Some of us laughed at the subject; some liked it; but she declared that, in 
order to make a picture of the gentleman, she must first see his face. We then b
egan to think over all our friends' faces to see if any of them would do, and no
ne suited us, and so the matter stood; that's all. I don't know why Nicolai Arda
lionovitch has brought up the joke now. What was appropriate and funny then, has
 quite lost all interest by this time."
   "Probably there's some new silliness about it," said Mrs.
   Epanchin, sarcastically.
   "There is no silliness about it at all-only the profoundest respect," said Ag
laya, very seriously. She had quite recovered her temper; in fact, from certain 
signs, it was fair to conclude that she was delighted to see this joke going so 
far; and a careful observer might have remarked that her satisfaction dated from
 the moment when the fact of the prince's confusion became apparent to all.
   "'Profoundest respect!' What nonsense! First, insane giggling, and then, all 
of a sudden, a display of 'profoundest respect.'
   Why respect? Tell me at once, why have you suddenly developed this 'profound 
respect,' eh?"
   "Because," replied Aglaya gravely, "in the poem the knight is described as a 
man capable of living up to an ideal all his life.
   That sort of thing is not to be found every day among the men of our times. I
n the poem it is not stated exactly what the ideal was, but it was evidently som
e vision, some revelation of pure Beauty, and the knight wore round his neck, in
stead of a scarf, a rosary. A device-A. N. B.-the meaning of which is not explai
ned, was inscribed on his shield-"
   "No, A. N. D.," corrected Colia.
   "I say A. N. B., and so it shall be!" cried Aglaya, irritably.
   "Anyway, the 'poor knight' did not care what his lady was, or what she did. H
e had chosen his ideal, and he was bound to serve her, and break lances for her,
 and acknowledge her as the ideal of pure Beauty, whatever she might say or do a
fterwards. If she had taken to stealing, he would have championed her just the s
ame. I think the poet desired to embody in this one picture the whole spirit of 
medieval chivalry and the platonic love of a pure and high-souled knight. Of cou
rse it's all an ideal, and in the 'poor knight' that spirit reached the utmost l
imit of asceticism.
   He is a Don Quixote, only serious and not comical. I used not to understand h
im, and laughed at him, but now I love the 'poor knight,' and respect his action
s."
   So ended Aglaya; and, to look at her, it was difficult, indeed, to judge whet
her she was joking or in earnest.
   "Pooh! he was a fool, and his actions were the actions of a fool," said Mrs. 
Epanchin; "and as for you, young woman, you ought to know better. At all events,
 you are not to talk like that again. What poem is it? Recite it! I want to hear
 this poem!
   I have hated poetry all my life. Prince, you must excuse this nonsense. We ne
ither of us like this sort of thing! Be patient!"
   They certainly were put out, both of them.
   The prince tried to say something, but he was too confused, and could not get
 his words out. Aglaya, who had taken such liberties in her little speech, was t
he only person present, perhaps, who was not in the least embarrassed. She seeme
d, in fact, quite pleased.
   She now rose solemnly from her seat, walked to the centre of the terrace, and
 stood in front of the prince's chair. All looked on with some surprise, and Pri
nce S. and her sisters with feelings of decided alarm, to see what new frolic sh
e was up to; it had gone quite far enough already, they thought. But Aglaya evid
ently thoroughly enjoyed the affectation and ceremony with which she was introdu
cing her recitation of the poem.
   Mrs. Epanchin was just wondering whether she would not forbid the performance
 after all, when, at the very moment that Aglaya commenced her declamation, two 
new guests, both talking loudly, entered from the street. The new arrivals were 
General Epanchin and a young man.
   Their entrance caused some slight commotion.
      VII.
   THE young fellow accompanying the general was about twenty-eight, tall, and w
ell built, with a handsome and clever face, and bright black eyes, full of fun a
nd intelligence.
   Aglaya did not so much as glance at the new arrivals, but went on with her re
citation, gazing at the prince the while in an affected manner, and at him alone
. It was clear to him that she was doing all this with some special object.
   But the new guests at least somewhat eased his strained and uncomfortable pos
ition. Seeing them approaching, he rose from his chair, and nodding amicably to 
the general, signed to him not to interrupt the recitation. He then got behind h
is chair, and stood there with his left hand resting on the back of it. Thanks t
o this change of position, he was able to listen to the ballad with far less emb
arrassment than before. Mrs. Epanchin had also twice motioned to the new arrival
s to be quiet, and stay where they were.
   The prince was much interested in the young man who had just entered. He easi
ly concluded that this was Evgenie Pavlovitch Radomski, of whom he had already h
eard mention several times. He was puzzled, however, by the young man's plain cl
othes, for he had always heard of Evgenie Pavlovitch as a military man. An ironi
cal smile played on Evgenie's lips all the while the recitation was proceeding, 
which showed that he, too, was probably in the secret of the 'poor knight' joke.
 But it had become quite a different matter with Aglaya. All the affectation of 
manner which she had displayed at the beginning disappeared as the ballad procee
ded. She spoke the lines in so serious and exalted a manner, and with so much ta
ste, that she even seemed to justify the exaggerated solemnity with which she ha
d stepped forward. It was impossible to discern in her now anything but a deep f
eeling for the spirit of the poem which she had undertaken to interpret.
   Her eyes were aglow with inspiration, and a slight tremor of rapture passed o
ver her lovely features once or twice. She continued to recite:
   "Once there came a vision glorious,
   Mystic, dreadful, wondrous fair;
   Burned itself into his spirit,
   And abode for ever there!
   "Never more-from that sweet moment-Gazed he on womankind;
   He was dumb to love and wooing
   And to all their graces blind.
   "Full of love for that sweet vision,
   Brave and pure he took the field;
   With his blood he stained the letters
   N. P. B. upon his shield.
   "'Lumen caeli, sancta Rosa!'
   Shouting on the foe he fell,
   And like thunder rang his war-cry
   O'er the cowering infidel.
   "Then within his distant castle,
   Home returned, he dreamed his daysSilent, sad,-and when death took him He was
 mad, the legend says."
   When recalling all this afterwards the prince could not for the life of him u
nderstand how to reconcile the beautiful, sincere, pure nature of the girl with 
the irony of this jest. That it was a jest there was no doubt whatever; he knew 
that well enough, and had good reason, too, for his conviction; for during her r
ecitation of the ballad Aglaya had deliberately changed the letters A. N. B. int
o N. P. B. He was quite sure she had not done this by accident, and that his ear
s had not deceived him. At all events her performance-which was a joke, of cours
e, if rather a crude one,-was premeditated. They had evidently talked (and laugh
ed) over the 'poor knight' for more than a month.
   Yet Aglaya had brought out these letters N. P. B. not only without the slight
est appearance of irony, or even any particular accentuation, but with so even a
nd unbroken an appearance of seriousness that assuredly anyone might have suppos
ed that these initials were the original ones written in the ballad. The thing m
ade an uncomfortable impression upon the prince. Of course Mrs.
   Epanchin saw nothing either in the change of initials or in the insinuation e
mbodied therein. General Epanchin only knew that there was a recitation of verse
s going on, and took no further interest in the matter. Of the rest of the audie
nce, many had understood the allusion and wondered both at the daring of the lad
y and at the motive underlying it, but tried to show no sign of their feelings. 
But Evgenie Pavlovitch (as the prince was ready to wager) both comprehended and 
tried his best to show that he comprehended; his smile was too mocking to leave 
any doubt on that point.
   "How beautiful that is!" cried Mrs. Epanchin, with sincere admiration. "Whose
 is it? ' "Pushkin's, mama, of course! Don't disgrace us all by showing your ign
orance," said Adelaida.
   "As soon as we reach home give it to me to read."
   "I don't think we have a copy of Pushkin in the house."
   "There are a couple of torn volumes somewhere; they have been lying about fro
m time immemorial," added Alexandra.
   "Send Feodor or Alexey up by the very first train to buy a copy, then.-Aglaya
, come here-kiss me, dear, you recited beautifully! but," she added in a whisper
, "if you were sincere I am sorry for you. If it was a joke, I do not approve of
 the feelings which prompted you to do it, and in any case you would have done f
ar better not to recite it at all. Do you understand?-Now come along, young woma
n; we've sat here too long. I'll speak to you about this another time."
   Meanwhile the prince took the opportunity of greeting General Epanchin, and t
he general introduced Evgenie Pavlovitch to him.
   "I caught him up on the way to your house," explained the general. "He had he
ard that we were all here."
   "Yes, and I heard that you were here, too," added Evgenie Pavlovitch; "and si
nce I had long promised myself the pleasure of seeking not only your acquaintanc
e but your friendship, I did not wish to waste time, but came straight on. I am 
sorry to hear that you are unwell."
   "Oh, but I'm quite well now, thank you, and very glad to make your acquaintan
ce. Prince S. has often spoken to me about you," said Muishkin, and for an insta
nt the two men looked intently into one another's eyes.
   The prince remarked that Evgenie Pavlovitch's plain clothes had evidently mad
e a great impression upon the company present, so much so that all other interes
ts seemed to be effaced before this surprising fact.
   His change of dress was evidently a matter of some importance.
   Adelaida and Alexandra poured out a stream of questions; Prince S., a relativ
e of the young man, appeared annoyed; and Ivan Fedorovitch quite excited. Aglaya
 alone was not interested. She merely looked closely at Evgenie for a minute, cu
rious perhaps as to whether civil or military clothes became him best, then turn
ed away and paid no more attention to him or his costume. Lizabetha Prokofievna 
asked no questions, but it was clear that she was uneasy, and the prince fancied
 that Evgenie was not in her good graces.
   "He has astonished me," said Ivan Fedorovitch. "I nearly fell down with surpr
ise. I could hardly believe my eyes when I met him in Petersburg just now. Why t
his haste? That's what I want to know. He has always said himself that there is 
no need to break windows."
   Evgenie Pavlovitch remarked here that he had spoken of his intention of leavi
ng the service long ago. He had, however, always made more or less of a joke abo
ut it, so no one had taken him seriously. For that matter he joked about everyth
ing, and his friends never knew what to believe, especially if he did not wish t
hem to understand him.
   "I have only retired for a time," said he, laughing. "For a few months; at mo
st for a year."
   "But there is no necessity for you to retire at all," complained the general,
 "as far as I know."
   "I want to go and look after my country estates. You advised me to do that yo
urself," was the reply. "And then I wish to go abroad."
   After a few more expostulations, the conversation drifted into other channels
, but the prince, who had been an attentive listener, thought all this excitemen
t about so small a matter very curious. "There must be more in it than appears,"
 he said to himself.
   "I see the 'poor knight' has come on the scene again," said Evgenie Pavlovitc
h, stepping to Aglaya's side.
   To the amazement of the prince, who overheard the remark, Aglaya looked haugh
tily and inquiringly at the questioner, as though she would give him to know, on
ce for all, that there could be no talk between them about the 'poor knight,' an
d that she did not understand his question.
   "But not now! It is too late to send to town for a Pushkin now.
   It is much too late, I say!" Colia was exclaiming in a loud voice. "I have to
ld you so at least a hundred times."
   "Yes, it is really much too late to send to town now," said Evgenie Pavlovitc
h, who had escaped from Aglaya as rapidly as possible. "I am sure the shops are 
shut in Petersburg; it is past eight o'clock," he added, looking at his watch.
   "We have done without him so far," interrupted Adelaida in her turn. "Surely 
we can wait until to-morrow."
   "Besides," said Colia, "it is quite unusual, almost improper, for people in o
ur position to take any interest in literature. Ask Evgenie Pavlovitch if I am n
ot right. It is much more fashionable to drive a waggonette with red wheels."
   "You got that from some magazine, Colia," remarked Adelaida.
   "He gets most of his conversation in that way," laughed Evgenie Pavlovitch. "
He borrows whole phrases from the reviews. I have long had the pleasure of knowi
ng both Nicholai Ardalionovitch and his conversational methods, but this time he
 was not repeating something he had read; he was alluding, no doubt, to my yello
w waggonette, which has, or had, red wheels. But I have exchanged it, so you are
 rather behind the times, Colia."
   The prince had been listening attentively to Radomski's words, and thought hi
s manner very pleasant. When Colia chaffed him about his waggonette he had repli
ed with perfect equality and in a friendly fashion. This pleased Muishkin.
   At this moment Vera came up to Lizabetha Prokofievna, carrying several large 
and beautifully bound books, apparently quite new.
   "What is it?" demanded the lady.
   "This is Pushkin," replied the girl. "Papa told me to offer it to you."
   "What? Impossible!" exclaimed Mrs. Epanchin.
   "Not as a present, not as a present! I should not have taken the liberty," sa
id Lebedeff, appearing suddenly from behind his daughter. "It is our own Pushkin
, our family copy, Annenkoff's edition; it could not be bought now. I beg to sug
gest, with great respect, that your excellency should buy it, and thus quench th
e noble literary thirst which is consuming you at this moment," he concluded gra
ndiloquently.
   "Oh! if you will sell it, very good-and thank you. You shall not be a loser! 
But for goodness' sake, don't twist about like that, sir! I have heard of you; t
hey tell me you are a very learned person. We must have a talk one of these days
. You will bring me the books yourself?"
   "With the greatest respect and and veneration," replied Lebedeff, making extrao
rdinary grimaces.
   "Well, bring them, with or without respect, provided always you do not drop t
hem on the way; but on the condition," went on the lady, looking full at him, "t
hat you do not cross my threshold. I do not intend to receive you today. You may
 send your daughter Vera at once, if you like. I am much pleased with her."
   "Why don't you tell him about them?" said Vera impatiently to her father. "Th
ey will come in, whether you announce them or not, and they are beginning to mak
e a row. Lef Nicolaievitch,"-she addressed herself to the prince-"four men are h
ere asking for you. They have waited some time, and are beginning to make a fuss
, and papa will not bring them in."
   "Who are these people?" said the prince.
   "They say that they have come on business, and they are the kind of men, who,
 if you do not see them here, will follow you about the street. It would be bett
er to receive them, and then you will get rid of them. Gavrila Ardalionovitch an
d Ptitsin are both there, trying to make them hear reason."
   "Pavlicheff's son! It is not worth while!" cried Lebedeff. "There is no neces
sity to see them, and it would be most unpleasant for your excellency. They do n
ot deserve"
   "What? Pavlicheff's son!" cried the prince, much perturbed. "I know I know-but
 I entrusted this matter to Gavrila Ardalionovitch. He told me"
   At that moment Gania, accompanied by Ptitsin, came out to the terrace. From a
n adjoining room came a noise of angry voices, and General Ivolgin, in loud tone
s, seemed to be trying to shout them down. Colia rushed off at once to investiga
te the cause of the uproar.
   "This is most interesting!" observed Evgenie Pavlovitch.
   "I expect he knows all about it!" thought the prince.
   "What, the son of Pavlicheff? And who may this son of Pavlicheff be?" asked G
eneral Epanchin with surprise; and looking curiously around him, he discovered t
hat he alone had no clue to the mystery. Expectation and suspense were on every 
face, with the exception of that of the prince, who stood gravely wondering how 
an affair so entirely personal could have awakened such lively and widespread in
terest in so short a time.
   Aglaya went up to him with a peculiarly serious look "It will be well," she s
aid, "if you put an end to this affair yourself AT ONCE: but you must allow us t
o be your witnesses.
   They want to throw mud at you, prince, and you must be triumphantly vindicate
d. I give you joy beforehand!"
   "And I also wish for justice to be done, once for all," cried Madame Epanchin
, "about this impudent claim. Deal with them promptly, prince, and don't spare t
hem! I am sick of hearing about the affair, and many a quarrel I have had in you
r cause.
   But I confess I am anxious to see what happens, so do make them come out here
, and we will remain. You have heard people talking about it, no doubt?" she add
ed, turning to Prince S.
   "Of course," said he. "I have heard it spoken about at your house, and I am a
nxious to see these young men!"
   "They are Nihilists, are they not?"
   "No, they are not Nihilists," explained Lebedeff, who seemed much excited. "T
his is another lot-a special group. According to my nephew they are more advance
d even than the Nihilists. You are quite wrong, excellency, if you think that yo
ur presence will intimidate them; nothing intimidates them. Educated men, learne
d men even, are to be found among Nihilists; these go further, in that they are 
men of action. The movement is, properly speaking, a derivative from Nihilism-th
ough they are only known indirectly, and by hearsay, for they never advertise th
eir doings in the papers. They go straight to the point. For them, it is not a q
uestion of showing that Pushkin is stupid, or that Russia must be torn in pieces
. No; but if they have a great desire for anything, they believe they have a rig
ht to get it even at the cost of the lives, say, of eight persons. They are chec
ked by no obstacles. In fact, prince, I should not advise you"
   But Muishkin had risen, and was on his way to open the door for his visitors.
   "You are slandering them, Lebedeff," said he, smiling.
   "You are always thinking about your nephew's conduct. Don't believe him, Liza
betha Prokofievna. I can assure you Gorsky and Daniloff are exceptions-and that 
these are only mistaken.
   However, I do not care about receiving them here, in public.
   Excuse me, Lizabetha Prokofievna. They are coming, and you can see them, and 
then I will take them away. Please come in, gentlemen!"
   Another thought tormented him: He wondered was this an arranged business-arra
nged to happen when he had guests in his house, and in anticipation of his humil
iation rather than of his triumph?
   But he reproached himself bitterly for such a thought, and felt as if he shou
ld die of shame if it were discovered. When his new visitors appeared, he was qu
ite ready to believe himself infinitely less to be respected than any of them.
   Four persons entered, led by General Ivolgin, in a state of great excitement,
 and talking eloquently.
   "He is for me, undoubtedly!" thought the prince, with a smile.
   Colia also had joined the party, and was talking with animation to Hippolyte,
 who listened with a jeering smile on his lips.
   The prince begged the visitors to sit down. They were all so young that it ma
de the proceedings seem even more extraordinary.
   Ivan Fedorovitch, who really understood nothing of what was going on, felt in
dignant at the sight of these youths, and would have interfered in some way had 
it not been for the extreme interest shown by his wife in the affair. He therefo
re remained, partly through curiosity, partly through good-nature, hoping that h
is presence might be of some use. But the bow with which General Ivolgin greeted
 him irritated him anew; he frowned, and decided to be absolutely silent.
   As to the rest, one was a man of thirty, the retired officer, now a boxer, wh
o had been with Rogojin, and in his happier days had given fifteen roubles at a 
time to beggars. Evidently he had joined the others as a comrade to give them mo
ral, and if necessary material, support. The man who had been spoken of as "Pavl
icheff's son," although he gave the name of Antip Burdovsky, was about twenty-tw
o years of age, fair, thin and rather tall. He was remarkable for the poverty, n
ot to say uncleanliness, of his personal appearance: the sleeves of his overcoat
 were greasy; his dirty waistcoat, buttoned up to his neck, showed not a trace o
f linen; a filthy black silk scarf, twisted till it resembled a cord, was round 
his neck, and his hands were unwashed. He looked round with an air of insolent e
ffrontery. His face, covered with pimples, was neither thoughtful nor even conte
mptuous; it wore an expression of complacent satisfaction in demanding his right
s and in being an aggrieved party. His voice trembled, and he spoke so fast, and
 with such stammerings, that he might have been taken for a foreigner, though th
e purest Russian blood ran in his veins. Lebedeff's nephew, whom the reader has 
seen already, accompanied him, and also the youth named Hippolyte Terentieff.
   The latter was only seventeen or eighteen. He had an intelligent face, though
 it was usually irritated and fretful in expression.
   His skeleton-like figure, his ghastly complexion, the brightness of his eyes,
 and the red spots of colour on his cheeks, betrayed the victim of consumption t
o the most casual glance. He coughed persistently, and panted for breath; it loo
ked as though he had but a few weeks more to live. He was nearly dead with fatig
ue, and fell, rather than sat, into a chair. The rest bowed as they came in; and
 being more or less abashed, put on an air of extreme self-assurance. In short, 
their attitude was not that which one would have expected in men who professed t
o despise all trivialities, all foolish mundane conventions, and indeed everythi
ng, except their own personal interests.
   "Antip Burdovsky," stuttered the son of Pavlicheff.
   "Vladimir Doktorenko," said Lebedeff's nephew briskly, and with a certain pri
de, as if he boasted of his name.
   "Keller," murmured the retired officer.
   "Hippolyte Terentieff," cried the last-named, in a shrill voice.
   They sat now in a row facing the prince, and frowned, and played with their c
aps. All appeared ready to speak, and yet all were silent; the defiant expressio
n on their faces seemed to say, "No, sir, you don't take us in!" It could be fel
t that the first word spoken by anyone present would bring a torrent of speech f
rom the whole deputation.
      VIII.
   "I DID not expect you, gentlemen," began the prince. I have been ill until to
-day. A month ago," he continued, addressing himself to Antip Burdovsky, "I put 
your business into Gavrila Ardalionovitch Ivolgin's hands, as I told you then. I
 do not in the least object to having a personal interview but you will agree wit
h me that this is hardly the time I propose that we go into another room, if you 
will not keep me long As you see, I have friends here, and believe me"
   "Friends as many as you please, but allow me," interrupted the harsh voice of
 Lebedeff's nephew-" allow me to tell you that you might have treated us rather 
more politely, and not have kept us waiting at least two hours
   "No doubt and I is that acting like a prince? And you you may be a general! But 
I I am not your valet! And I
   I" stammered Antip Burdovsky.
   He was extremely excited; his lips trembled, and the resentment of an embitte
red soul was in his voice. But he spoke so indistinctly that hardly a dozen word
s could be gathered.
   "It was a princely action!" sneered Hippolyte.
   "If anyone had treated me so," grumbled the boxer.
   "I mean to say that if I had been in Burdovsky's placeI"
   "Gentlemen, I did not know you were there; I have only just been informed, I 
assure you," repeated Muishkin.
   "We are not afraid of your friends, prince," remarked Lebedeff's nephew, "for
 we are within our rights."
   The shrill tones of Hippolyte interrupted him. "What right have you by what ri
ght do you demand us to submit this matter, about Burdovsky to the judgment of yo
ur friends? We know only too well what the judgment of your friends will be!"
   This beginning gave promise of a stormy discussion. The prince was much disco
uraged, but at last he managed to make himself heard amid the vociferations of h
is excited visitors.
   "If you," he said, addressing Burdovsky-"if you prefer not to speak here, I o
ffer again to go into another room with you and as to your waiting to see me, I r
epeat that I only this instant heard"
   "Well, you have no right, you have no right, no right at all!
   Your friends indeed!" gabbled Burdovsky, defiantly examining the faces round h
im, and becoming more and more excited. "You have no right!" As he ended thus abr
uptly, he leant forward, staring at the prince with his short-sighted, bloodshot
 eyes. The latter was so astonished, that he did not reply, but looked steadily 
at him in return.
   "Lef Nicolaievitch!" interposed Madame Epanchin, suddenly, "read this at once
, this very moment! It is about this business."
   She held out a weekly comic paper, pointing to an article on one of its pages
. Just as the visitors were coming in, Lebedeff, wishing to ingratiate himself w
ith the great lady, had pulled this paper from his pocket, and presented it to h
er, indicating a few columns marked in pencil. Lizabetha Prokofievna had had tim
e to read some of it, and was greatly upset.
   "Would it not be better to peruse it alone" later asked the prince, nervously.
   "No, no, read it-read it at once directly, and aloud, aloud!" cried she, call
ing Colia to her and giving him the journal.-"
   Read it aloud, so that everyone may hear it!"
   An impetuous woman, Lizabetha Prokofievna sometimes weighed her anchors and p
ut out to sea quite regardless of the possible storms she might encounter. Ivan 
Fedorovitch felt a sudden pang of alarm, but the others were merely curious, and
 somewhat surprised. Colia unfolded the paper, and began to read, in his clear, 
high-pitched voice, the following article:
   "Proletarians and scions of nobility! An episode of the brigandage of today a
nd every day! Progress! Reform! Justice!"
   "Strange things are going on in our so-called Holy Russia in this age of refo
rm and great enterprises; this age of patriotism in which hundreds of millions a
re yearly sent abroad; in which industry is encouraged, and the hands of Labour 
paralyzed, etc.; there is no end to this, gentlemen, so let us come to the point
.
   A strange thing has happened to a scion of our defunct aristocracy. (DE PROFU
NDIS!) The grandfathers of these scions ruined themselves at the gaming-tables; 
their fathers were forced to serve as officers or subalterns; some have died jus
t as they were about to be tried for innocent thoughtlessness in the handling of
 public funds. Their children are sometimes congenital idiots, like the hero of 
our story; sometimes they are found in the dock at the Assizes, where they are g
enerally acquitted by the jury for edifying motives; sometimes they distinguish 
themselves by one of those burning scandals that amaze the public and add anothe
r blot to the stained record of our age. Six months ago-that is, last winter-thi
s particular scion returned to Russia, wearing gaiters like a foreigner, and shi
vering with cold in an old scantily-lined cloak. He had come from Switzerland, w
here he had just undergone a successful course of treatment for idiocy (SIC!). C
ertainly Fortune favoured him, for, apart from the interesting malady of which h
e was cured in Switzerland (can there be a cure for idiocy?) his story proves th
e truth of the Russian proverb that 'happiness is the right of certain classes!'
   Judge for yourselves. Our subject was an infant in arms when he lost his fath
er, an officer who died just as he was about to be court-martialled for gambling
 away the funds of his company, and perhaps also for flogging a subordinate to e
xcess (remember the good old days, gentlemen). The orphan was brought up by the 
charity of a very rich Russian landowner. In the good old days, this man, whom w
e will call P-, owned four thousand souls as serfs (souls as serfs!-can you unde
rstand such an expression, gentlemen? I cannot; it must be looked up in a dictio
nary before one can understand it; these things of a bygone day are already unin
telligible to us). He appears to have been one of those Russian parasites who le
ad an idle existence abroad, spending the summer at some spa, and the winter in 
Paris, to the greater profit of the organizers of public balls. It may safely be
 said that the manager of the Chateau des Fleurs (lucky man!) pocketed at least 
a third of the money paid by Russian peasants to their lords in the days of serf
dom. However this may be, the gay P-brought up the orphan like a prince, provide
d him with tutors and governesses (pretty, of course!) whom he chose himself in 
Paris.
   But the little aristocrat, the last of his noble race, was an idiot. The gove
rnesses, recruited at the Chateau des Fleurs, laboured in vain; at twenty years 
of age their pupil could not speak in any language, not even Russian. But ignora
nce of the latter was still excusable. At last P- was seized with a strange noti
on; he imagined that in Switzerland they could change an idiot into a mail of se
nse. After all, the idea was quite logical; a parasite and landowner naturally s
upposed that intelligence was a marketable commodity like everything else, and t
hat in Switzerland especially it could be bought for money.
   The case was entrusted to a celebrated Swiss professor, and cost thousands of
 roubles; the treatment lasted five years. Needless to say, the idiot did not be
come intelligent, but it is alleged that he grew into something more or less res
embling a man. At this stage P- died suddenly, and, as usual, he had made no wil
l and left his affairs in disorder. A crowd of eager claimants arose, who cared 
nothing about any last scion of a noble race undergoing treatment in Switzerland
, at the expense of the deceased, as a congenital idiot. Idiot though he was, th
e noble scion tried to cheat his professor, and they say he succeeded in getting
 him to continue the treatment gratis for two years, by concealing the death of 
his benefactor. But the professor himself was a charlatan. Getting anxious at la
st when no money was forthcoming, and alarmed above all by his patient's appetit
e, he presented him with a pair of old gaiters and a shabby cloak and packed him
 off to Russia, third class. It would seem that Fortune had turned her back upon
 our hero. Not at all; Fortune, who lets whole populations die of hunger, shower
ed all her gifts at once upon the little aristocrat, like Kryloff's Cloud which 
passes over an arid plain and empties itself into the sea. He had scarcely arriv
ed in St. Petersburg, when a relation of his mother's (who was of bourgeois orig
in, of course), died at Moscow. He was a merchant, an Old Believer, and he had n
o children. He left a fortune of several millions in good current coin, and ever
ything came to our noble scion, our gaitered baron, formerly treated for idiocy 
in a Swiss lunatic asylum. Instantly the scene changed, crowds of friends gather
ed round our baron, who meanwhile had lost his head over a celebrated demi-monda
ine; he even discovered some relations; moreover a number of young girls of high
 birth burned to be united to him in lawful matrimony. Could anyone possibly ima
gine a better match?
   Aristocrat, millionaire, and idiot, he has every advantage! One might hunt in
 vain for his equal, even with the lantern of Diogenes; his like is not to be ha
d even by getting it made to order!"
   "Oh, I don't know what this means" cried Ivan Fedorovitch, transported with i
ndignation.
   "Leave off, Colia," begged the prince. Exclamations arose on all sides.
   "Let him go on reading at all costs!" ordered Lizabetha Prokofievna, evidentl
y preserving her composure by a desperate effort. "Prince, if the reading is sto
pped, you and I will quarrel."
   Colia had no choice but to obey. With crimson cheeks he read on unsteadily:
   "But while our young millionaire dwelt as it were in the Empyrean, something 
new occurred. One fine morning a man called upon him, calm and severe of aspect,
 distinguished, but plainly dressed. Politely, but in dignified terms, as befitt
ed his errand, he briefly explained the motive for his visit. He was a lawyer of
 enlightened views; his client was a young man who had consulted him in confiden
ce. This young man was no other than the son of P-, though he bears another name
. In his youth P-, the sensualist, had seduced a young girl, poor but respectabl
e. She was a serf, but had received a European education. Finding that a child w
as expected, he hastened her marriage with a man of noble character who had love
d her for a long time. He helped the young couple for a time, but he was soon ob
liged to give up, for the high-minded husband refused to accept anything from hi
m. Soon the careless nobleman forgot all about his former mistress and the child
 she had borne him; then, as we know, he died intestate. P-'s son, born after hi
s mother's marriage, found a true father in the generous man whose name he bore.
 But when he also died, the orphan was left to provide for himself, his mother n
ow being an invalid who had lost the use of her limbs. Leaving her in a distant 
province, he came to the capital in search of pupils. By dint of daily toil he e
arned enough to enable him to follow the college courses, and at last to enter t
he university. But what can one earn by teaching the children of Russian merchan
ts at ten copecks a lesson, especially with an invalid mother to keep? Even her 
death did not much diminish the hardships of the young man's struggle for existe
nce. Now this is the question: how, in the name of justice, should our scion hav
e argued the case? Our readers will think, no doubt, that he would say to himsel
f: 'P-showered benefits upon me all my life; he spent tens of thousands of roubl
es to educate me, to provide me with governesses, and to keep me under treatment
 in Switzerland. Now I am a millionaire, and P-'s son, a noble young man who is 
not responsible for the faults of his careless and forgetful father, is wearing 
himself out giving ill-paid lessons. According to justice, all that was done for
 me ought to have been done for him. The enormous sums spent upon me were not re
ally mine; they came to me by an error of blind Fortune, when they ought to have
 gone to P-'s son. They should have gone to benefit him, not me, in whom P- inte
rested himself by a mere caprice, instead of doing his duty as a father.
   If I wished to behave nobly, justly, and with delicacy, I ought to bestow hal
f my fortune upon the son of my benefactor; but as economy is my favourite virtu
e, and I know this is not a case in which the law can intervene, I will not give
 up half my millions.
   But it would be too openly vile, too flagrantly infamous, if I did not at lea
st restore to P-'s son the tens of thousands of roubles spent in curing my idioc
y. This is simply a case of conscience and of strict justice. Whatever would hav
e become of me if P- had not looked after my education, and had taken care of hi
s own son instead of me?' "No, gentlemen, our scions of the nobility do not reas
on thus.
   The lawyer, who had taken up the matter purely out of friendship to the young
 man, and almost against his will, invoked every consideration of justice, delic
acy, honour, and even plain figures; in vain, the ex-patient of the Swiss lunati
c asylum was inflexible. All this might pass, but the sequel is absolutely unpar
donable, and not to be excused by any interesting malady.
   This millionaire, having but just discarded the old gaiters of his professor,
 could not even understand that the noble young man slaving away at his lessons 
was not asking for charitable help, but for his rightful due, though the debt wa
s not a legal one; that, correctly speaking, he was not asking for anything, but
 it was merely his friends who had thought fit to bestir themselves on his behal
f. With the cool insolence of a bloated capitalist, secure in his millions, he m
ajestically drew a banknote for fifty roubles from his pocket-book and sent it t
o the noble young man as a humiliating piece of charity. You can hardly believe 
it, gentlemen! You are scandalized and disgusted; you cry out in indignation! Bu
t that is what he did! Needless to say, the money was returned, or rather flung 
back in his face. The case is not within the province of the law, it must be ref
erred to the tribunal of public opinion; this is what we now do, guaranteeing th
e truth of all the details which we have related."
   When Colia had finished reading, he handed the paper to the prince, and retir
ed silently to a corner of the room, hiding his face in his hands. He was overco
me by a feeling of inexpressible shame; his boyish sensitiveness was wounded bey
ond endurance. It seemed to him that something extraordinary, some sudden catast
rophe had occurred, and that he was almost the cause of it, because he had read 
the article aloud.
   Yet all the others were similarly affected. The girls were uncomfortable and 
ashamed. Lizabetha Prokofievna restrained her violent anger by a great effort; p
erhaps she bitterly regretted her interference in the matter; for the present sh
e kept silence.
   The prince felt as very shy people often do in such a case; he was so ashamed
 of the conduct of other people, so humiliated for his guests, that he dared not
 look them in the face. Ptitsin, Varia, Gania, and Lebedeff himself, all looked 
rather confused.
   Stranger still, Hippolyte and the "son of Pavlicheff" also seemed slightly su
rprised, and Lebedeff's nephew was obviously far from pleased. The boxer alone w
as perfectly calm; he twisted his moustaches with affected dignity, and if his e
yes were cast down it was certainly not in confusion, but rather in noble modest
y, as if he did not wish to be insolent in his triumph. It was evident that he w
as delighted with the article.
   "The devil knows what it means," growled Ivan Fedorovitch, under his breath; 
"it must have taken the united wits of fifty footmen to write it."
   "May I ask your reason for such an insulting supposition, sir?" said Hippolyt
e, trembling with rage.
   You will admit yourself, general, that for an honourable man, if the author i
s an honourable man, that is an-an insult," growled the boxer suddenly, with con
vulsive jerkings of his shoulders.
   "In the first place, it is not for you to address me as 'sir,' and, in the se
cond place, I refuse to give you any explanation," said Ivan Fedorovitch vehemen
tly; and he rose without another word, and went and stood on the first step of t
he flight that led from the verandah to the street, turning his back on the comp
any.
   He was indignant with Lizabetha Prokofievna, who did not think of moving even
 now.
   "Gentlemen, gentlemen, let me speak at last," cried the prince, anxious and a
gitated. "Please let us understand one another. I say nothing about the article,
 gentlemen, except that every word is false; I say this because you know it as w
ell as I do. It is shameful. I should be surprised if any one of you could have 
written it."
   "I did not know of its existence till this moment," declared Hippolyte. "I do
 not approve of it."
   "I knew it had been written, but I would not have advised its publication," s
aid Lebedeff's nephew, "because it is premature."
   "I knew it, but I have a right. I I "stammered the "son of Pavlicheff."
   "What! Did you write all that yourself? Is it possible?" asked the prince, re
garding Burdovsky with curiosity.
   "One might dispute your right to ask such questions," observed Lebedeff's nep
hew.
   "I was only surprised that Mr. Burdovsky should have-however, this is what I 
have to say. Since you had already given the matter publicity, why did you objec
t just now, when I began to speak of it to my friends?"
   "At last!" murmured Lizabetha Prokofievna indignantly.
   Lebedeff could restrain himself no longer; he made his way through the row of
 chairs.
   "Prince," he cried, "you are forgetting that if you consented to receive and 
hear them, it was only because of your kind heart which has no equal, for they h
ad not the least right to demand it, especially as you had placed the matter in 
the hands of Gavrila Ardalionovitch, which was also extremely kind of you. You a
re also forgetting, most excellent prince, that you are with friends, a select c
ompany; you cannot sacrifice them to these gentlemen, and it is only for you to 
have them turned out this instant. As the master of the house I shall have great
 pleasure "
   "Quite right!" agreed General Ivolgin in a loud voice.
   "That will do, Lebedeff, that will do-" began the prince, when an indignant o
utcry drowned his words.
   "Excuse me, prince, excuse me, but now that will not do," shouted Lebedeff's 
nephew, his voice dominating all the others. "The matter must be clearly stated,
 for it is obviously not properly understood. They are calling in some legal chi
canery, and upon that ground they are threatening to turn us out of the house!
   Really, prince, do you think we are such fools as not to be aware that this m
atter does not come within the law, and that legally we cannot claim a rouble fr
om you? But we are also aware that if actual law is not on our side, human law i
s for us, natural law, the law of common-sense and conscience, which is no less 
binding upon every noble and honest man-that is, every man of sane judgment-beca
use it is not to be found in miserable legal codes.
   If we come here without fear of being turned out (as was threatened just now)
 because of the imperative tone of our demand, and the unseemliness of such a vi
sit at this late hour (though it was not late when we arrived, we were kept wait
ing in your anteroom), if, I say, we came in without fear, it is just because we
 expected to find you a man of sense; I mean, a man of honour and conscience. It
 is quite true that we did not present ourselves humbly, like your flatterers an
d parasites, but holding up our heads as befits independent men. We present no p
etition, but a proud and free demand (note it well, we do not beseech, we demand
!). We ask you fairly and squarely in a dignified manner.
   Do you believe that in this affair of Burdovsky you have right on your side? 
Do you admit that Pavlicheff overwhelmed you with benefits, and perhaps saved yo
ur life? If you admit it (which we take for granted), do you intend, now that yo
u are a millionaire, and do you not think it in conformity with justice, to inde
mnify Burdovsky? Yes or no? If it is yes, or, in other words, if you possess wha
t you call honour and conscience, and we more justly call common-sense, then acc
ede to our demand, and the matter is at an end. Give us satisfaction, without en
treaties or thanks from us; do not expect thanks from us, for what you do will b
e done not for our sake, but for the sake of justice. If you refuse to satisfy u
s, that is, if your answer is no, we will go away at once, and there will be an 
end of the matter. But we will tell you to your face before the present company 
that you are a man of vulgar and undeveloped mind; we will openly deny you the r
ight to speak in future of your honour and conscience, for you have not paid the
 fair price of such a right. I have no more to say-I have put the question befor
e you. Now turn us out if you dare.
   You can do it; force is on your side. But remember that we do not beseech, we
 demand! We do not beseech, we demand!"
   With these last excited words, Lebedeff's nephew was silent.
   "We demand, we demand, we demand, we do not beseech," spluttered Burdovsky, r
ed as a lobster.
   The speech of Lebedeff's nephew caused a certain stir among the company; murm
urs arose, though with the exception of Lebedeff, who was still very much excite
d, everyone was careful not to interfere in the matter. Strangely enough, Lebede
ff, although on the prince's side, seemed quite proud of his nephew's eloquence.
   Gratified vanity was visible in the glances he cast upon the assembled compan
y.
   "In my opinion, Mr. Doktorenko," said the prince, in rather a low voice, "you
 are quite right in at least half of what you say. I would go further and say th
at you are altogether right, and that I quite agree with you, if there were not 
something lacking in your speech. I cannot undertake to say precisely what it is
, but you have certainly omitted something, and you cannot be quite just while t
here is something lacking. But let us put that aside and return to the point. Te
ll me what induced you to publish this article. Every word of it is a calumny, a
nd I think, gentlemen, that you have been guilty of a mean action."
   "Allow me-"
   "Sir-"
   "What? What? What?" cried all the visitors at once, in violent agitation.
   "As to the article," said Hippolyte in his croaking voice, "I have told you a
lready that we none of us approve of it! There is the writer," he added, pointin
g to the boxer, who sat beside him.
   "I quite admit that he has written it in his old regimental manner, with an e
qual disregard for style and decency. I know he is a cross between a fool and an
 adventurer; I make no bones about telling him so to his face every day. But aft
er all he is half justified; publicity is the lawful right of every man; consequ
ently, Burdovsky is not excepted. Let him answer for his own blunders. As to the
 objection which I made just now in the name of all, to the presence of your fri
ends, I think I ought to explain, gentlemen, that I only did so to assert our ri
ghts, though we really wished to have witnesses; we had agreed unanimously upon 
the point before we came in. We do not care who your witnesses may be, or whethe
r they are your friends or not.
   As they cannot fail to recognize Burdovsky's right (seeing that it is mathema
tically demonstrable), it is just as well that the witnesses should be your frie
nds. The truth will only be more plainly evident."
   "It is quite true; we had agreed upon that point," said Lebedeff's nephew, in
 confirmation.
   "If that is the case, why did you begin by making such a fuss about it?" aske
d the astonished prince.
   The boxer was dying to get in a few words; owing, no doubt, to the presence o
f the ladies, he was becoming quite jovial.
   "As to the article, prince," he said, "I admit that I wrote it, in spite of t
he severe criticism of my poor friend, in whom I always overlook many things bec
ause of his unfortunate state of health. But I wrote and published it in the for
m of a letter, in the paper of a friend. I showed it to no one but Burdovsky, an
d I did not read it all through, even to him. He immediately gave me permission 
to publish it, but you will admit that I might have done so without his consent.
 Publicity is a noble, beneficent, and universal right. I hope, prince, that you
 are too progressive to deny this?"
   "I deny nothing, but you must confess that your article-"
   "Is a bit thick, you mean? Well, in a way that is in the public interest; you
 will admit that yourself, and after all one cannot overlook a blatant fact. So 
much the worse for the guilty parties, but the public welfare must come before e
verything. As to certain inaccuracies and figures of speech, so to speak, you wi
ll also admit that the motive, aim, and intention, are the chief thing. It is a 
question, above all, of making a wholesome example; the individual case can be e
xamined afterwards; and as to the style-well, the thing was meant to be humorous
, so to speak, and, after all, everybody writes like that; you must admit it you
rself! Ha, ha!"
   "But, gentlemen, I assure you that you are quite astray," exclaimed the princ
e. "You have published this article upon the supposition that I would never cons
ent to satisfy Mr. Burdovsky.
   Acting on that conviction, you have tried to intimidate me by this publicatio
n and to be revenged for my supposed refusal. But what did you know of my intent
ions? It may be that I have resolved to satisfy Mr. Burdovsky's claim. I now dec
lare openly, in the presence of these witnesses, that I will do so."
   "The noble and intelligent word of an intelligent and most noble man, at last
!" exclaimed the boxer.
   "Good God!" exclaimed Lizabetha Prokofievna involuntarily.
   "This is intolerable," growled the general.
   "Allow me, gentlemen, allow me," urged the prince.
   "I will explain matters to you. Five weeks ago I received a visit from Tcheba
roff, your agent, Mr. Burdovsky. You have given a very flattering description of
 him in your article, Mr. Keller," he continued, turning to the boxer with a smi
le, "but he did not please me at all. I saw at once that Tchebaroff was the movi
ng spirit in the matter, and, to speak frankly, I thought he might have induced 
you, Mr. Burdovsky, to make this claim, by taking advantage of your simplicity."
   "You have no right I am not simple," stammered Burdovsky, much agitated.
   "You have no sort of right to suppose such things," said Lebedeff's nephew in
 a tone of authority.
   "It is most offensive!" shrieked Hippolyte; "it is an insulting suggestion, f
alse, and most ill-timed."
   "I beg your pardon, gentlemen; please excuse me," said the prince. "I thought
 absolute frankness on both sides would be best, but have it your own way. I tol
d Tchebaroff that, as I was not in Petersburg, I would commission a friend to lo
ok into the matter without delay, and that I would let you know, Mr.
   Burdovsky. Gentlemen, I have no hesitation in telling you that it was the fac
t of Tchebaroff's intervention that made me suspect a fraud. Oh! do not take off
ence at my words, gentlemen, for Heaven's sake do not be so touchy!" cried the p
rince, seeing that Burdovsky was getting excited again, and that the rest were p
reparing to protest. "If I say I suspected a fraud, there is nothing personal in
 that. I had never seen any of you then; I did not even know your names; I only 
judged by Tchebaroff; I am speaking quite generally-if you only knew how I have 
been 'done' since I came into my fortune!"
   "You are shockingly naive, prince," said Lebedeff's nephew in mocking tones.
   "Besides, though you are a prince and a millionaire, and even though you may 
really be simple and good-hearted, you can hardly be outside the general law," H
ippolyte declared loudly.
   "Perhaps not; it is very possible," the prince agreed hastily,
   "though I do not know what general law you allude to. I will go on-only pleas
e do not take offence without good cause. I assure you I do not mean to offend y
ou in the least. Really, it is impossible to speak three words sincerely without
 your flying into a rage! At first I was amazed when Tchebaroff told me that Pav
licheff had a son, and that he was in such a miserable position. Pavlicheff was 
my benefactor, and my father's friend.
   Oh, Mr. Keller, why does your article impute things to my father without the 
slightest foundation? He never squandered the funds of his company nor ill-treat
ed his subordinates, I am absolutely certain of it; I cannot imagine how you cou
ld bring yourself to write such a calumny! But your assertions concerning Pavlic
heff are absolutely intolerable! You do not scruple to make a libertine of that 
noble man; you call him a sensualist as coolly as if you were speaking the truth
, and yet it would not be possible to find a chaster man. He was even a scholar 
of note, and in correspondence with several celebrated scientists, and spent lar
ge sums in the interests of science. As to his kind heart and his good actions, 
you were right indeed when you said that I was almost an idiot at that time, and
 could hardly understand anything-(I could speak and understand Russian, though)
,-but now I can appreciate what I remember-"
   "Excuse me," interrupted Hippolyte, "is not this rather sentimental? You said
 you wished to come to the point; please remember that it is after nine o'clock.
"
   "Very well, gentlemen-very well," replied the prince. "At first I received th
e news with mistrust, then I said to myself that I might be mistaken, and that P
avlicheff might possibly have had a son. But I was absolutely amazed at the read
iness with which the son had revealed the secret of his birth at the expense of 
his mother's honour. For Tchebaroff had already menaced me with publicity in our
 interview"
   "What nonsense!" Lebedeff's nephew interrupted violently.
   "You have no right-you have no right!" cried Burdovsky.
   "The son is not responsible for the misdeeds of his father; and the mother is
 not to blame," added Hippolyte, with warmth.
   "That seems to me all the more reason for sparing her," said the prince timid
ly.
   "Prince, you are not only simple, but your simplicity is almost past the limi
t," said Lebedeff's nephew, with a sarcastic smile.
   "But what right had you?" said Hippolyte in a very strange tone.
   "None-none whatever," agreed the prince hastily. "I admit you are right there
, but it was involuntary, and I immediately said to myself that my personal feel
ings had nothing to do with it,-that if I thought it right to satisfy the demand
s of Mr.
   Burdovsky, out of respect for the memory of Pavlicheff, I ought to do so in a
ny case, whether I esteemed Mr. Burdovsky or not. I only mentioned this, gentlem
en, because it seemed so unnatural to me for a son to betray his mother's secret
 in such a way. In short, that is what convinced me that Tchebaroff must be a ro
gue, and that he had induced Mr. Burdovsky to attempt this fraud."
   "But this is intolerable!" cried the visitors, some of them starting to their
 feet.
   "Gentlemen, I supposed from this that poor Mr. Burdovsky must be a simple-min
ded man, quite defenceless, and an easy tool in the hands of rogues. That is why
 I thought it my duty to try and help him as 'Pavlicheff's son'; in the first pl
ace by rescuing him from the influence of Tchebaroff, and secondly by making mys
elf his friend. I have resolved to give him ten thousand roubles; that is about 
the sum which I calculate that Pavlicheff must have spent on me."
   "What, only ten thousand!" cried Hippolyte.
   "Well, prince, your arithmetic is not up to much, or else you are mighty clev
er at it, though you affect the air of a simpleton," said Lebedeff's nephew.
   "I will not accept ten thousand roubles," said Burdovsky.
   "Accept, Antip," whispered the boxer eagerly, leaning past the back of Hippol
yte's chair to give his friend this piece of advice. "Take it for the present; w
e can see about more later on."
   "Look here, Mr. Muishkin," shouted Hippolyte, "please understand that we are 
not fools, nor idiots, as your guests seem to imagine; these ladies who look upo
n us with such scorn, and especially this fine gentleman" (pointing to Evgenie P
avlovitch) "whom I have not the honour of knowing, though I think I have heard s
ome talk about him-"
   "Really, really, gentlemen," cried the prince in great agitation,
   "you are misunderstanding me again. In the first place, Mr.
   Keller, you have greatly overestimated my fortune in your article. I am far f
rom being a millionaire. I have barely a tenth of what you suppose. Secondly, my
 treatment in Switzerland was very far from costing tens of thousands of roubles
. Schneider received six hundred roubles a year, and he was only paid for the fi
rst three years. As to the pretty governesses whom Pavlicheff is supposed to hav
e brought from Paris, they only exist in Mr.
   Keller's imagination; it is another calumny. According to my calculations, th
e sum spent on me was very considerably under ten thousand roubles, but I decide
d on that sum, and you must admit that in paying a debt I could not offer Mr. Bu
rdovsky more, however kindly disposed I might be towards him; delicacy forbids i
t; I should seem to be offering him charity instead of rightful payment. I don't
 know how you cannot see that, gentlemen!
   Besides, I had no intention of leaving the matter there. I meant to intervene
 amicably later on and help to improve poor Mr.
   Burdovsky's position. It is clear that he has been deceived, or he would neve
r have agreed to anything so vile as the scandalous revelations about his mother
 in Mr. Keller's article. But, gentlemen, why are you getting angry again? Are w
e never to come to an understanding? Well, the event has proved me right! I have
 just seen with my own eyes the proof that my conjecture was correct!" he added,
 with increasing eagerness.
   He meant to calm his hearers, and did not perceive that his words had only in
creased their irritation.
   "What do you mean? What are you convinced of?" they demanded angrily.
   "In the first place, I have had the opportunity of getting a correct idea of 
Mr. Burdovsky. I see what he is for myself. He is an innocent man, deceived by e
veryone! A defenceless victim, who deserves indulgence! Secondly, Gavrila Ardali
onovitch, in whose hands I had placed the matter, had his first interview with m
e barely an hour ago. I had not heard from him for some time, as I was away, and
 have been ill for three days since my return to St.
   Petersburg. He tells me that he has exposed the designs of Tchebaroff and has
 proof that justifies my opinion of him. I know, gentlemen, that many people thi
nk me an idiot. Counting upon my reputation as a man whose purse-strings are eas
ily loosened, Tchebaroff thought it would be a simple matter to fleece me, espec
ially by trading on my gratitude to Pavlicheff.
   But the main point is-listen, gentlemen, let me finish!-the main point is tha
t Mr. Burdovsky is not Pavlicheff's son at all.
   Gavrila Ardalionovitch has just told me of his discovery, and assures me that
 he has positive proofs. Well, what do you think of that? It is scarcely credibl
e, even after all the tricks that have been played upon me. Please note that we 
have positive proofs! I can hardly believe it myself, I assure you; I do not yet
 believe it; I am still doubtful, because Gavrila Ardalionovitch has not had tim
e to go into details; but there can be no further doubt that Tchebaroff is a rog
ue! He has deceived poor Mr. Burdovsky, and all of you, gentlemen, who have come
 forward so nobly to support your friend-(he evidently needs support, I quite se
e that!). He has abused your credulity and involved you all in an attempted frau
d, for when all is said and done this claim is nothing else!"
   "What! a fraud? What, he is not Pavlicheff's son? Impossible!"
   These exclamations but feebly expressed the profound bewilderment into which 
the prince's words had plunged Burdovsky's companions.
   "Certainly it is a fraud! Since Mr. Burdovsky is not Pavlicheff's son, his cl
aim is neither more nor less than attempted fraud (supposing, of course, that he
 had known the truth), but the fact is that he has been deceived. I insist on th
is point in order to justify him; I repeat that his simple-mindedness makes him 
worthy of pity, and that he cannot stand alone; otherwise he would have behaved 
like a scoundrel in this matter. But I feel certain that he does not understand 
it! I was just the same myself before I went to Switzerland; I stammered incoher
ently; one tries to express oneself and cannot. I understand that. I am all the 
better able to pity Mr. Burdovsky, because I know from experience what it is to 
be like that, and so I have a right to speak. Well, though there is no such pers
on as 'Pavlicheff's son,' and it is all nothing but a humbug, yet I will keep to
 my decision, and I am prepared to give up ten thousand roubles in memory of Pav
licheff. Before Mr. Burdovsky made this claim, I proposed to found a school with
 this money, in memory of my benefactor, but I shall honour his memory quite as 
well by giving the ten thousand roubles to Mr. Burdovsky, because, though he was
 not Pavlicheff's son, he was treated almost as though he were. That is what gav
e a rogue the opportunity of deceiving him; he really did think himself Pavliche
ff's son. Listen, gentlemen; this matter must be settled; keep calm; do not get 
angry; and sit down! Gavrila Ardalionovitch will explain everything to you at on
ce, and I confess that I am very anxious to hear all the details myself. He says
 that he has even been to Pskoff to see your mother, Mr.
   Burdovsky; she is not dead, as the article which was just read to us makes ou
t. Sit down, gentlemen, sit down!"
   The prince sat down, and at length prevailed upon Burdovsky's company to do l
ikewise. During the last ten or twenty minutes, exasperated by continual interru
ptions, he had raised his voice, and spoken with great vehemence. Now, no doubt,
 he bitterly regretted several words and expressions which had escaped him in hi
s excitement. If he had not been driven beyond the limits of endurance, he would
 not have ventured to express certain conjectures so openly. He had no sooner sa
t down than his heart was torn by sharp remorse. Besides insulting Burdovsky wit
h the supposition, made in the presence of witnesses, that he was suffering from
 the complaint for which he had himself been treated in Switzerland, he reproach
ed himself with the grossest indelicacy in having offered him the ten thousand r
oubles before everyone. "I ought to have waited till to-morrow and offered him t
he money when we were alone," thought Muishkin. "Now it is too late, the mischie
f is done! Yes, I am an idiot, an absolute idiot!" he said to himself, overcome 
with shame and regret.
   Till then Gavrila Ardalionovitch had sat apart in silence. When the prince ca
lled upon him, he came and stood by his side, and in a calm, clear voice began t
o render an account of the mission confided to him. All conversation ceased inst
antly. Everyone, especially the Burdovsky party, listened with the utmost curios
ity.
      IX.
   "You will not deny, I am sure," said Gavrila Ardalionovitch, turning to Burdo
vsky, who sat looking at him with wide-open eyes, perplexed and astonished. You 
will not deny, seriously, that you were born just two years after your mother's 
legal marriage to Mr. Burdovsky, your father. Nothing would be easier than to pr
ove the date of your birth from well-known facts; we can only look on Mr. Keller
's version as a work of imagination, and one, moreover, extremely offensive both
 to you and your mother. Of course he distorted the truth in order to strengthen
 your claim, and to serve your interests. Mr. Keller said that he previously con
sulted you about his article in the paper, but did not read it to you as a whole
. Certainly he could not have read that passage. 
   "As a matter of fact, I did not read it," interrupted the boxer,
   "but its contents had been given me on unimpeachable authority, and I"
   "Excuse me, Mr. Keller," interposed Gavrila Ardalionovitch.
   "Allow me to speak. I assure you your article shall be mentioned in its prope
r place, and you can then explain everything, but for the moment I would rather 
not anticipate. Quite accidentally, with the help of my sister, Varvara Ardalion
ovna Ptitsin, I obtained from one of her intimate friends, Madame Zoubkoff, a le
tter written to her twenty-five years ago, by Nicolai Andreevitch Pavlicheff, th
en abroad. After getting into communication with this lady, I went by her advice
 to Timofei Fedorovitch Viazovkin, a retired colonel, and one of Pavlicheff's ol
dest friends. He gave me two more letters written by the latter when he was stil
l in foreign parts. These three documents, their dates, and the facts mentioned 
in them, prove in the most undeniable manner, that eighteen months before your b
irth, Nicolai Andreevitch went abroad, where he remained for three consecutive y
ears. Your mother, as you are well aware, has never been out of Russia It is too 
late to read the letters now;
   I am content to state the fact. But if you desire it, come to me tomorrow mor
ning, bring witnesses and writing experts with you, and I will prove the absolut
e truth of my story. From that moment the question will be decided."
   These words caused a sensation among the listeners, and there was a general m
ovement of relief. Burdovsky got up abruptly.
   "If that is true," said he, "I have been deceived, grossly deceived, but not 
by Tchebaroff: and for a long time past, a long time. I do not wish for experts,
 not I, nor to go to see you. I believe you. I give it up But I refuse the ten th
ousand roubles. Good-bye."
   "Wait five minutes more, Mr. Burdovsky," said Gavrila Ardalionovitch pleasant
ly. "I have more to say. Some rather curious and important facts have come to li
ght, and it is absolutely necessary, in my opinion, that you should hear them.
   You will not regret, I fancy, to have the whole matter thoroughly cleared up.
"
   Burdovsky silently resumed his seat, and bent his head as though in profound 
thought. His friend, Lebedeff's nephew, who had risen to accompany him, also sat
 down again. He seemed much disappointed, though as self-confident as ever. Hipp
olyte looked dejected and sulky, as well as surprised. He had just been attacked
 by a violent fit of coughing, so that his handkerchief was stained with blood.
   The boxer looked thoroughly frightened.
   "Oh, Antip!" cried he in a miserable voice, "I did say to you the other day-t
he day before yesterday-that perhaps you were not really Pavlicheff's son!"
   There were sounds of half-smothered laughter at this.
   "Now, that is a valuable piece of information, Mr. Keller," replied Gania. "H
owever that may be, I have private information which convinces me that Mr. Burdo
vsky, though doubtless aware of the date of his birth, knew nothing at all about
 Pavlicheff's sojourn abroad. Indeed, he passed the greater part of his life out
 of Russia, returning at intervals for short visits. The journey in question is 
in itself too unimportant for his friends to recollect it after more than twenty
 years; and of course Mr.
   Burdovsky could have known nothing about it, for he was not born.
   As the event has proved, it was not impossible to find evidence of his absenc
e, though I must confess that chance has helped me in a quest which might very w
ell have come to nothing. It was really almost impossible for Burdovsky or Tcheb
aroff to discover these facts, even if it had entered their heads to try. Natura
lly they never dreamt
   Here the voice of Hippolyte suddenly intervened.
   "Allow me, Mr. Ivolgin," he said irritably. "What is the good of all this rig
marole? Pardon me. All is now clear, and we acknowledge the truth of your main p
oint. Why go into these tedious details? You wish perhaps to boast of the clever
ness of your investigation, to cry up your talents as detective? Or perhaps your
 intention is to excuse Burdovsky, by roving that he took up the matter in ignor
ance? Well, I consider that extremely impudent on your part! You ought to know t
hat Burdovsky has no need of being excused or justified by you or anyone else! I
t is an insult! The affair is quite painful enough for him without that. Will no
thing make you understand?"
   "Enough! enough! Mr. Terentieff," interrupted Gania.
   "Don't excite yourself; you seem very ill, and I am sorry for that. I am almo
st done, but there are a few facts to which I must briefly refer, as I am convin
ced that they ought to be clearly explained once for all" A movement of impatienc
e was noticed in his audience as he resumed: "I merely wish to state, for the in
formation of all concerned, that the reason for Mr. Pavlicheff's interest in you
r mother, Mr. Burdovsky, was simply that she was the sister of a serf-girl with 
whom he was deeply in love in his youth, and whom most certainly he would have m
arried but for her sudden death. I have proofs that this circumstance is almost,
 if not quite, forgotten. I may add that when your mother was about ten years ol
d, Pavlicheff took her under his care, gave her a good education, and later, a c
onsiderable dowry. His relations were alarmed, and feared he might go so far as 
to marry her, but she gave her hand to a young land-surveyor named Burdovsky whe
n she reached the age of twenty.
   I can even say definitely that it was a marriage of affection.
   After his wedding your father gave up his occupation as landsurveyor, and wit
h his wife's dowry of fifteen thousand roubles went in for commercial speculatio
ns. As he had had no experience, he was cheated on all sides, and took to drink 
in order to forget his troubles. He shortened his life by his excesses, and eigh
t years after his marriage he died. Your mother says herself that she was left i
n the direst poverty, and would have died of starvation had it not been for Pavl
icheff, who generously allowed her a yearly pension of six hundred roubles. Many
 people recall his extreme fondness for you as a little boy. Your mother confirm
s this, and agrees with others in thinking that he loved you the more because yo
u were a sickly child, stammering in your speech, and almost deformed-for it is 
known that all his life Nicolai Andreevitch had a partiality for unfortunates of
 every kind, especially children. In my opinion this is most important.
   I may add that I discovered yet another fact, the last on which I employed my
 detective powers. Seeing how fond Pavlicheff was of you,-it was thanks to him y
ou went to school, and also had the advantage of special teachers-his relations 
and servants grew to believe that you were his son, and that your father had bee
n betrayed by his wife. I may point out that this idea was only accredited gener
ally during the last years of Pavlicheff's life, when his next-of-kin were tremb
ling about the succession, when the earlier story was quite forgotten, and when 
all opportunity for discovering the truth had seemingly passed away. No doubt yo
u, Mr. Burdovsky, heard this conjecture, and did not hesitate to accept it as tr
ue. I have had the honour of making your mother's acquaintance, and I find that 
she knows all about these reports. What she does not know is that you, her son, 
should have listened to them so complaisantly. I found your respected mother at 
Pskoff, ill and in deep poverty, as she has been ever since the death of your be
nefactor. She told me with tears of gratitude how you had supported her; she exp
ects much of you, and believes fervently in your future success"
   "Oh, this is unbearable!" said Lebedeff's nephew impatiently.
   "What is the good of all this romancing?"
   "It is revolting and unseemly!" cried Hippolyte, jumping up in a fury.
   Burdovsky alone sat silent and motionless.
   "What is the good of it?" repeated Gavrila Ardalionovitch, with pretended sur
prise. "Well, firstly, because now perhaps Mr.
   Burdovsky is quite convinced that Mr. Pavlicheff's love for him came simply f
rom generosity of soul, and not from paternal duty.
   It was most necessary to impress this fact upon his mind, considering that he
 approved of the article written by Mr.
   Keller. I speak thus because I look on you, Mr. Burdovsky, as an honourable m
an. Secondly, it appears that there was no intention of cheating in this case, e
ven on the part of Tchebaroff. I wish to say this quite plainly, because the pri
nce hinted a while ago that I too thought it an attempt at robbery and extortion
. On the contrary, everyone has been quite sincere in the matter, and although T
chebaroff may be somewhat of a rogue, in this business he has acted simply as an
y sharp lawyer would do under the circumstances. He looked at it as a case that 
might bring him in a lot of money, and he did not calculate badly; because on th
e one hand he speculated on the generosity of the prince, and his gratitude to t
he late Mr. Pavlicheff, and on the other to his chivalrous ideas as to the oblig
ations of honour and conscience.
   As to Mr. Burdovsky, allowing for his principles, we may acknowledge that he 
engaged in the business with very little personal aim in view. At the instigatio
n of Tchebaroff and his other friends, he decided to make the attempt in the ser
vice of truth, progress, and humanity. In short, the conclusion may be drawn tha
t, in spite of all appearances, Mr. Burdovsky is a man of irreproachable charact
er, and thus the prince can all the more readily offer him his friendship, and t
he assistance of which he spoke just now"
   "Hush! hush! Gavrila Ardalionovitch!" cried Muishkin in dismay, but it was to
o late.
   "I said, and I have repeated it over and over again," shouted Burdovsky furio
usly, "that I did not want the money. I will not take it whyI will not I am going a
way!"
   He was rushing hurriedly from the terrace, when Lebedeff's nephew seized his 
arms, and said something to him in a low voice.
   Burdovsky turned quickly, and drawing an addressed but unsealed envelope from
 his pocket, he threw it down on a little table beside the prince.
   "There's the money! How dare you?The money!"
   "Those are the two hundred and fifty roubles you dared to send him as a chari
ty, by the hands of Tchebaroff," explained Doktorenko.
   "The article in the newspaper put it at fifty!" cried Colia.
   "I beg your pardon," said the prince, going up to Burdovsky. "I have done you
 a great wrong, but I did not send you that money as a charity, believe me. And 
now I am again to blame. I offended you just now." (The prince was much distress
ed; he seemed worn out with fatigue, and spoke almost incoherently.) "I spoke of
 swindling but I did not apply that to you. I was deceived  I said you were afflict
ed like me But you are not like me you give lessons you support your mother. I said 
you had dishonoured your mother, but you love her. She says so herself I did not 
know Gavrila Ardalionovitch did not tell me that Forgive me! I dared to offer you 
ten thousand roubles, but I was wrong. I ought to have done it differently, and 
now there is no way of doing it, for you despise me"
   "I declare, this is a lunatic asylum!" cried Lizabetha Prokofievna.
   "Of course it is a lunatic asylum!" repeated Aglaya sharply, but her words we
re overpowered by other voices. Everybody was talking loudly, making remarks and
 comments; some discussed the affair gravely, others laughed. Ivan Fedorovitch E
panchin was extremely indignant. He stood waiting for his wife with an air of of
fended dignity. Lebedeff's nephew took up the word again.
   "Well, prince, to do you justice, you certainly know how to make the most of 
your-let us call it infirmity, for the sake of politeness; you have set about of
fering your money and friendship in such a way that no self-respecting man could
 possibly accept them. This is an excess of ingenuousness or of malice-you ought
 to know better than anyone which word best fits the case."
   "Allow me, gentlemen," said Gavrila Ardalionovitch, who had just examined the
 contents of the envelope, "there are only a hundred roubles here, not two hundr
ed and fifty. I point this out, prince, to prevent misunderstanding."
   "Never mind, never mind," said the prince, signing to him to keep quiet.
   "But we do mind," said Lebedeff's nephew vehemently. "Prince, your 'never min
d' is an insult to us. We have nothing to hide; our actions can bear daylight. I
t is true that there are only a hundred roubles instead of two hundred and fifty
, but it is all the same."
   "Why, no, it is hardly the same," remarked Gavrila Ardalionovitch, with an ai
r of ingenuous surprise.
   "Don't interrupt, we are not such fools as you think, Mr.
   Lawyer," cried Lebedeff's nephew angrily. "Of course there is a difference be
tween a hundred roubles and two hundred and fifty, but in this case the principl
e is the main point, and that a hundred and fifty roubles are missing is only a 
side issue. The point to be emphasized is that Burdovsky will not accept your hi
ghness's charity; he flings it back in your face, and it scarcely matters if the
re are a hundred roubles or two hundred and fifty. Burdovsky has refused ten tho
usand roubles; you heard him. He would not have returned even a hundred roubles 
if he was dishonest! The hundred and fifty roubles were paid to Tchebaroff for h
is travelling expenses. You may jeer at our stupidity and at our inexperience in
 business matters; you have done all you could already to make us look ridiculou
s; but do not dare to call us dishonest. The four of us will club together every
 day to repay the hundred and fifty roubles to the prince, if we have to pay it 
in instalments of a rouble at a time, but we will repay it, with interest. Burdo
vsky is poor, he has no millions. After his journey to see the prince Tchebaroff
 sent in his bill. We counted on winning Who would not have done the same in such
 a case?"
   "Who indeed?" exclaimed Prince S.
   "I shall certainly go mad, if I stay here!" cried Lizabetha Prokofievna.
   "It reminds me," said Evgenie Pavlovitch, laughing, "of the famous plea of a 
certain lawyer who lately defended a man for murdering six people in order to ro
b them. He excused his client on the score of poverty. 'It is quite natural,' he
 said in conclusion, 'considering the state of misery he was in, that he should 
have thought of murdering these six people; which of you, gentlemen, would not h
ave done the same in his place?'"
   "Enough," cried Lizabetha Prokofievna abruptly, trembling with anger, "we hav
e had enough of this balderdash!"
   In a state of terrible excitement she threw back her head, with flaming eyes,
 casting looks of contempt and defiance upon the whole company, in which she cou
ld no longer distinguish friend from foe. She had restrained herself so long tha
t she felt forced to vent her rage on somebody. Those who knew Lizabetha Prokofi
evna saw at once how it was with her. "She flies into these rages sometimes," sa
id Ivan Fedorovitch to Prince S. the next day, "but she is not often so violent 
as she was yesterday; it does not happen more than once in three years."
   "Be quiet, Ivan Fedorovitch! Leave me alone!" cried Mrs.
   Epanchin. "Why do you offer me your arm now? You had not sense enough to take
 me away before. You are my husband, you are a father, it was your duty to drag 
me away by force, if in my folly I refused to obey you and go quietly. You might
 at least have thought of your daughters. We can find our way out now without yo
ur help. Here is shame enough for a year! Wait a moment 'till I thank the prince
! Thank you, prince, for the entertainment you have given us! It was most amusin
g to hear these young men It is vile, vile! A chaos, a scandal, worse than a nigh
tmare! Is it possible that there can be many such people on earth? Be quiet, Agl
aya! Be quiet, Alexandra! It is none of your business! Don't fuss round me like 
that, Evgenie Pavlovitch; you exasperate me!
   So, my dear," she cried, addressing the prince, "you go so far as to beg thei
r pardon! He says, 'Forgive me for offering you a fortune.' And you, you mounteb
ank, what are you laughing at?" she cried, turning suddenly on Lebedeff's nephew
. "'We refuse ten thousand roubles; we do not beseech, we demand!' As if he did 
not know that this idiot will call on them tomorrow to renew his offers of money
 and friendship. You will, won't you? You will?
   Come, will you, or won't you?"
   "I shall," said the prince, with gentle humility.
   "You hear him! You count upon it, too," she continued, turning upon Doktorenk
o. "You are as sure of him now as if you had the money in your pocket. And there
 you are playing the swaggerer to throw dust in our eyes! No, my dear sir, you m
ay take other people in! I can see through all your airs and graces, I see your 
game!"
   "Lizabetha Prokofievna!" exclaimed the prince.
   "Come, Lizabetha Prokofievna, it is quite time for us to be going, we will ta
ke the prince with us," said Prince S. with a smile, in the coolest possible way
.
   The girls stood apart, almost frightened; their father was positively horrifi
ed. Mrs. Epanchin's language astonished everybody. Some who stood a little way o
ff smiled furtively, and talked in whispers. Lebedeff wore an expression of utmo
st ecstasy.
   "Chaos and scandal are to be found everywhere, madame," remarked Doktorenko, 
who was considerably put out of countenance.
   "Not like this! Nothing like the spectacle you have just given us, sir," answ
ered Lizabetha Prokofievna, with a sort of hysterical rage. "Leave me alone, wil
l you?" she cried violently to those around her, who were trying to keep her qui
et. "No, Evgenie Pavlovitch, if, as you said yourself just now, a lawyer said in
 open court that he found it quite natural that a man should murder six people b
ecause he was in misery, the world must be coming to an end. I had not heard of 
it before. Now I understand everything. And this stutterer, won't he turn out a 
murderer?" she cried, pointing to Burdovsky, who was staring at her with stupefa
ction. "I bet he will! He will have none of your money, possibly, he will refuse
 it because his conscience will not allow him to accept it, but he will go murde
ring you by night and walking off with your cashbox, with a clear conscience! He
 does not call it a dishonest action but 'the impulse of a noble despair'; 'a ne
gation'; or the devil knows what! Bah! everything is upside down, everyone walks
 head downwards. A young girl, brought up at home, suddenly jumps into a cab in 
the middle of the street, saying: 'Good-bye, mother, I married Karlitch, or Ivan
itch, the other day!' And you think it quite right? You call such conduct estima
ble and natural? The 'woman question'? Look here," she continued, pointing to Co
lia, "the other day that whippersnapper told me that this was the whole meaning 
of the 'woman question.' But even supposing that your mother is a fool, you are 
none the less, bound to treat her with humanity. Why did you come here tonight s
o insolently? 'Give us our rights, but don't dare to speak in our presence. Show
 us every mark of deepest respect, while we treat you like the scum of the earth
.'
   The miscreants have written a tissue of calumny in their article, and these a
re the men who seek for truth, and do battle for the right! 'We do not beseech, 
we demand, you will get no thanks from us, because you will be acting to satisfy
 your own conscience!'
   What morality! But, good. heavens! if you declare that the prince's generosit
y will, excite no gratitude in you, he might answer that he is not, bound to be 
grateful to Pavlicheff, who also was only satisfying his own conscience. But you
 counted on the prince's, gratitude towards Pavlicheff; you never lent him any m
oney; he owes you nothing; then what were you counting upon if not on his gratit
ude? And if you appeal to that sentiment in others, why should you expect to be 
exempted from it? They are mad! They say society is savage and. inhuman because 
it despises a young girl who has been seduced. But if you call society inhuman y
ou imply that the young girl is made to suffer by its censure. How then, can you
 hold her up to the scorn of society in the newspapers without realizing that yo
u are making her suffering, still greater? Madmen! Vain fools! They don't believ
e in God, they don't believe in Christ! But you are so eaten. up by pride and va
nity, that you will end by devouring each other-that is my prophecy! Is not this
 absurd? Is it not monstrous chaos?
   And after all this, that shameless creature will go and beg their pardon! Are
 there many people like you? What are you smiling at?
   Because I am not ashamed to disgrace myself before you?-Yes, I am disgraced-i
t can't be helped now! But don't you jeer at me, you scum!" (this was aimed at H
ippolyte). "He is almost at his last gasp, yet he corrupts others. You, have got
 hold of this lad "-(she pointed to Colia); "you, have turned his head, you have
 taught him to be an atheist, you don't believe in God, and you are not too old 
to be whipped, sir! A plague upon you! And so, Prince Lef Nicolaievitch, you wil
l call on them tomorrow, will you?" she asked the prince breathlessly, for the s
econd time.
   "Yes."
   "Then I will never speak to you again." She made a sudden movement to go, and
 then turned quickly back. "And you will call on that atheist?" she continued, p
ointing to Hippolyte. "How dare you grin at me like that?" she shouted furiously
, rushing at the invalid, whose mocking smile drove her to distraction.
   Exclamations arose on all sides.
   "Lizabetha Prokofievna! Lizabetha Prokofievna! Lizabetha Prokofievna!"
   "Mother, this is disgraceful!" cried Aglaya.
   Mrs. Epanchin had approached Hippolyte and seized him firmly by the arm, whil
e her eyes, blazing with fury, were fixed upon his face.
   "Do not distress yourself, Aglaya Ivanovitch," he answered calmly; "your moth
er knows that one cannot strike a dying man. I am ready to explain why I was lau
ghing. I shall be delighted if you will let me-"
   A violent fit of coughing, which lasted a full minute, prevented him from fin
ishing his sentence.
   "He is dying, yet he will not stop holding forth!" cried Lizabetha Prokofievn
a. She loosed her hold on his arm, almost terrified, as she saw him wiping the b
lood from his lips. "Why do you talk? You ought to go home to bed."
   "So I will," he whispered hoarsely. "As soon as I get home I will go to bed a
t once; and I know I shall be dead in a fortnight;
   Botkine told me so himself last week. That is why I should like to say a few 
farewell words, if you will let me."
   "But you must be mad! It is ridiculous! You should take care of yourself; wha
t is the use of holding a conversation now? Go home to bed, do!" cried Mrs. Epan
chin in horror.
   "When I do go to bed I shall never get up again," said Hippolyte, with a smil
e. "I meant to take to my bed yesterday and stay there till I died, but as my le
gs can still carry me, I put it off for two days, so as to come here with them t
o-day-but I am very tired."
   "Oh, sit down, sit down, why are you standing?"
   Lizabetha Prokofievna placed a chair for him with her own hands.
   "Thank you," he said gently. "Sit opposite to me, and let us talk. We must ha
ve a talk now, Lizabetha Prokofievna; I am very anxious for it." He smiled at he
r once more. "Remember that today, for the last time, I am out in the air, and i
n the company of my fellow-men, and that in a fortnight I shall I certainly be n
o longer in this world. So, in a way, this is my farewell to nature and to men. 
I am not very sentimental, but do you know, I am quite glad that all this has ha
ppened at Pavlofsk, where at least one can see a green tree."
   "But why talk now?" replied Lizabetha Prokofievna, more and more alarmed; "ar
e quite feverish. Just now you would not stop shouting, and now you can hardly b
reathe. You are gasping."
   "I shall have time to rest. Why will you not grant my last wish?
   Do you know, Lizabetha Prokofievna, that I have dreamed of meeting you for a 
long while? I had often heard of you from Colia; he is almost the only person wh
o still comes to see me.
   You are an original and eccentric woman; I have seen that for myself-Do you k
now, I have even been rather fond of you?"
   "Good heavens! And I very nearly struck him!"
   "You were prevented by Aglaya Ivanovna. I think I am not mistaken? That is yo
ur daughter, Aglaya Ivanovna? She is so beautiful that I recognized her directly
, although I had never seen her before. Let me, at least, look on beauty for the
 last time in my life," he said with a wry smile. "You are here with the prince,
 and your husband, and a large company. Why should you refuse to gratify my last
 wish?"
   "Give me a chair!" cried Lizabetha Prokofievna, but she seized one for hersel
f and sat down opposite to Hippolyte. "Colia, you must go home with him," she co
mmanded and tomorrow I will come my self. "
   "Will you let me ask the prince for a cup of tea? I am exhausted. Do you know 
what you might do, Lizabetha Prokofievna?
   I think you wanted to take the prince home with you for tea. Stay here, and l
et us spend the evening together. I am sure the prince will give us all some tea
. Forgive me for being so free and easy-but I know you are kind, and the prince 
is kind, too. In fact, we are all good-natured people-it is really quite comical
."
   The prince bestirred himself to give orders. Lebedeff hurried out, followed b
y Vera.
   "It is quite true," said Mrs. Epanchin decisively. "Talk, but not too loud, a
nd don't excite yourself. You have made me sorry for you. Prince, you don't dese
rve that I should stay and have tea with you, yet I will, all the same, but I wo
n't apologize. I apologize to nobody! Nobody! It is absurd! However, forgive me,
 prince, if I blew you up-that is, if you like, of course. But please don't let 
me keep anyone," she added suddenly to her husband and daughters, in a tone of r
esentment, as though they had grievously offended her. "I can come home alone qu
ite well."
   But they did not let her finish, and gathered round her eagerly.
   The prince immediately invited everyone to stay for tea, and apologized for n
ot having thought of it before. The general murmured a few polite words, and ask
ed Lizabetha Prokofievna if she did not feel cold on the terrace. He very nearly
 asked Hippolyte how long he had been at the University, but stopped himself in 
time. Evgenie Pavlovitch and Prince S. suddenly grew extremely gay and amiable. 
Adelaida and Alexandra had not recovered from their surprise, but it was now min
gled with satisfaction; in short, everyone seemed very much relieved that Lizabe
tha Prokofievna had got over her paroxysm. Aglaya alone still frowned, and sat a
part in silence. All the other guests stayed on as well; no one wanted to go, no
t even General Ivolgin, but Lebedeff said something to him in passing which did 
not seem to please him, for he immediately went and sulked in a corner.
   The prince took care to offer tea to Burdovsky and his friends as well as the
 rest. The invitation made them rather uncomfortable.
   They muttered that they would wait for Hippolyte, and went and sat by themsel
ves in a distant corner of the verandah. Tea was served at once; Lebedeff had no
 doubt ordered it for himself and his family before the others arrived. It was s
triking eleven.
      X.
   AFTER moistening his lips with the tea which Vera Lebedeff brought him, Hippo
lyte set the cup down on the table, and glanced round. He seemed confused and al
most at a loss.
   "Just look, Lizabetha Prokofievna," he began, with a kind of feverish haste; 
"these china cups are supposed to be extremely valuable. Lebedeff always keeps t
hem locked up in his chinacupboard; they were part of his wife's dowry. Yet he h
as brought them out tonight-in your honour, of course! He is so pleased-"
   He was about to add something else, but could not find the words.
   "There, he is feeling embarrassed; I expected as much," whispered Evgenie Pav
lovitch suddenly in the prince's ear. "It is a bad sign; what do you think? Now,
 out of spite, he will come out with something so outrageous that even Lizabetha
 Prokofievna will not be able to stand it."
   Muishkin looked at him inquiringly.
   "You do not care if he does?" added Evgenie Pavlovitch. "Neither do I; in fac
t, I should be glad, merely as a proper punishment for our dear Lizabetha Prokof
ievna. I am very anxious that she should get it, without delay, and I shall stay
 till she does. You seem feverish."
   "Never mind; by-and-by; yes, I am not feeling well," said the prince impatien
tly, hardly listening. He had just heard Hippolyte mention his own name.
   "You don't believe it?" said the invalid, with a nervous laugh.
   "I don't wonder, but the prince will have no difficulty in believing it; he w
ill not be at all surprised."
   "Do you hear, prince-do you hear that?" said Lizabetha Prokofievna, turning t
owards him.
   There was laughter in the group around her, and Lebedeff stood before her ges
ticulating wildly.
   "He declares that your humbug of a landlord revised this gentleman's article-
the article that was read aloud just now-in which you got such a charming dressi
ng-down."
   The prince regarded Lebedeff with astonishment.
   "Why don't you say something?" cried Lizabetha Prokofievna, stamping her foot
.
   "Well," murmured the prince, with his eyes still fixed on Lebedeff, "I can se
e now that he did."
   "Is it true?" she asked eagerly.
   "Absolutely, your excellency," said Lebedeff, without the least hesitation.
   Mrs. Epanchin almost sprang up in amazement at his answer, and at the assuran
ce of his tone.
   "He actually seems to boast of it!" she cried.
   "I am base-base!" muttered Lebedeff, beating his breast, and hanging his head
.
   "What do I care if you are base or not? He thinks he has only to say, 'I am b
ase,' and there is an end of it. As to you, prince, are you not ashamed?-I repea
t, are you not ashamed, to mix with such riff-raff? I will never forgive you!"
   "The prince will forgive me!" said Lebedeff with emotional conviction.
   Keller suddenly left his seat, and approached Lizabetha.
   Prokofievna.
   "It was only out of generosity, madame," he said in a resonant voice, "and be
cause I would not betray a friend in an awkward position, that I did not mention
 this revision before; though you heard him yourself threatening to kick us down
 the steps. To clear the matter up, I declare now that I did have recourse to hi
s assistance, and that I paid him six roubles for it. But I did not ask him to c
orrect my style; I simply went to him for information concerning the facts, of w
hich I was ignorant to a great extent, and which he was competent to give. The s
tory of the gaiters, the appetite in the Swiss professor's house, the substituti
on of fifty roubles for two hundred and fifty-all such details, in fact, were go
t from him. I paid him six roubles for them; but he did not correct the style."
   "I must state that I only revised the first part of the article," interposed 
Lebedeff with feverish impatience, while laughter rose from all around him; "but
 we fell out in the middle over one idea, so I never corrected the second part. 
Therefore I cannot be held responsible for the numerous grammatical blunders in 
it."
   "That is all he thinks of!" cried Lizabetha Prokofievna.
   "May I ask when this article was revised?" said Evgenie Pavlovitch to Keller.
   "Yesterday morning," he replied, "we had an interview which we all gave our w
ord of honour to keep secret."
   "The very time when he was cringing before you and making protestations of de
votion! Oh, the mean wretches! I will have nothing to do with your Pushkin, and 
your daughter shall not set foot in my house!"
   Lizabetha Prokofievna was about to rise, when she saw Hippolyte laughing, and
 turned upon him with irritation.
   "Well, sir, I suppose you wanted to make me look ridiculous?"
   "Heaven forbid!" he answered, with a forced smile. "But I am more than ever s
truck by your eccentricity, Lizabetha Prokofievna. I admit that I told you of Le
bedeff's duplicity, on purpose. I knew the effect it would have on you,-on you a
lone, for the prince will forgive him. He has probably forgiven him already, and
 is racking his brains to find some excuse for him-is not that the truth, prince
?"
   He gasped as he spoke, and his strange agitation seemed to increase.
   "Well?" said Mrs. Epanchin angrily, surprised at his tone; "well, what more?"
   "I have heard many things of the kind about youthey delighted me I have learned
 to hold you in the highest esteem," continued Hippolyte.
   His words seemed tinged with a kind of sarcastic mockery, yet he was extremel
y agitated, casting suspicious glances around him, growing confused, and constan
tly losing the thread of his ideas.
   All this, together with his consumptive appearance, and the frenzied expressi
on of his blazing eyes, naturally attracted the attention of everyone present.
   "I might have been surprised (though I admit I know nothing of the world), no
t only that you should have stayed on just now in the company of such people as 
myself and my friends, who are not of your class, but that you should let these y
oung ladies listen to such a scandalous affair, though no doubt novel-reading ha
s taught them all there is to know. I may be mistaken; I hardly know what I am s
aying; but surely no one but you would have stayed to please a whippersnapper (y
es, a whippersnapper; I admit it) to spend the evening and take part in everythi
ng-only to be ashamed of it tomorrow. (I know I express myself badly.) I admire 
and appreciate it all extremely, though the expression on the face of his excell
ency, your husband, shows that he thinks it very improper. He-he!" He burst out 
laughing, and was seized with a fit of coughing which lasted for two minutes and
 prevented him from speaking.
   "He has lost his breath now!" said Lizabetha Prokofievna coldly, looking at h
im with more curiosity than pity: "Come, my dear boy, that is quite enough-let u
s make an end of this."
   Ivan Fedorovitch, now quite out of patience, interrupted suddenly. "Let me re
mark in my turn, sir," he said in tones of deep annoyance, "that my wife is here
 as the guest of Prince Lef Nicolaievitch, our friend and neighbour, and that in
 any case, young man, it is not for you to pass judgment on the conduct of Lizab
etha Prokofievna, or to make remarks aloud in my presence concerning what feelin
gs you think may be read in my face. Yes, my wife stayed here," continued the ge
neral, with increasing irritation, "more out of amazement than anything else. Ev
eryone can understand that a collection of such strange young men would attract 
the attention of a person interested in contemporary life. I stayed myself, just
 as I sometimes stop to look on in the street when I see something that may be r
egarded as-as-as-"
   "As a curiosity," suggested Evgenie Pavlovitch, seeing his excellency involve
d in a comparison which he could not complete.
   "That is exactly the word I wanted," said the general with satisfaction-" a c
uriosity. However, the most astonishing and, if I may so express myself, the mos
t painful, thing in this matter, is that you cannot even understand, young man, 
that Lizabetha Prokofievna, only stayed with you because you are ill, -if you re
ally are dying-moved by the pity awakened by your plaintive appeal, and that her
 name, character, and social position place her above all risk of contamination.
 Lizabetha Prokofievna!" he continued, now crimson with rage, "if you are coming
, we will say goodnight to the prince, and-"
   "Thank you for the lesson, general," said Hippolyte, with unexpected gravity,
 regarding him thoughtfully.
   "Two minutes more, if you please, dear Ivan Fedorovitch," said Lizabetha Prok
ofievna to her husband; "it seems to me that he is in a fever and delirious; you
 can see by his eyes what a state he is in; it is impossible to let him go back 
to Petersburg tonight. Can you put him up, Lef Nicolaievitch? I hope you are not
 bored, dear prince," she added suddenly to Prince S. "Alexandra, my dear, come 
here! Your hair is coming down."
   She arranged her daughter's hair, which was not in the least disordered, and 
gave her a kiss. This was all that she had called her for.
   "I thought you were capable of development," said Hippolyte, coming out of hi
s fit of abstraction. "Yes, that is what I meant to say," he added, with the sat
isfaction of one who suddenly remembers something he had forgotten. "Here is Bur
dovsky, sincerely anxious to protect his mother; is not that so? And he himself 
is the cause of her disgrace. The prince is anxious to help Burdovsky and offers
 him friendship and a large sum of money, in the sincerity of his heart. And her
e they stand like two sworn enemies-ha, ha, ha! You all hate Burdovsky because h
is behaviour with regard to his mother is shocking and repugnant to you; do you 
not? Is not that true? Is it not true? You all have a passion for beauty and dis
tinction in outward forms; that is all you care for, isn't it? I have suspected 
for a long time that you cared for nothing else! Well, let me tell you that perh
aps there is not one of you who loved your mother as Burdovsky loved his.
   As to you, prince, I know that you have sent money secretly to Burdovsky's mo
ther through Gania. Well, I bet now," he continued with an hysterical laugh, "th
at Burdovsky will accuse you of indelicacy, and reproach you with a want of resp
ect for his mother! Yes, that is quite certain! Ha, ha, ha!"
   He caught his breath, and began to cough once more.
   "Come, that is enough! That is all now; you have no more to say?
   Now go to bed; you are burning with fever," said Lizabetha Prokofievna impati
ently. Her anxious eyes had never left the invalid. "Good heavens, he is going t
o begin again!"
   "You are laughing, I think? Why do you keep laughing at me?" said Hippolyte i
rritably to Evgenie Pavlovitch, who certainly was laughing.
   "I only want to know, Mr. Hippolyte-excuse me, I forget your surname."
   "Mr. Terentieff," said the prince.
   "Oh yes, Mr. Terentieff. Thank you prince. I heard it just now, but had forgo
tten it. I want to know, Mr. Terentieff, if what I have heard about you is true.
 It seems you are convinced that if you could speak to the people from a window 
for a quarter of an hour, you could make them all adopt your views and follow yo
u?"
   "I may have said so," answered Hippolyte, as if trying to remember. "Yes, I c
ertainly said so," he continued with sudden animation, fixing an unflinching gla
nce on his questioner. "What of it?"
   "Nothing. I was only seeking further information, to put the finishing touch.
"
   Evgenie Pavlovitch was silent, but Hippolyte kept his eyes fixed upon him, wa
iting impatiently for more.
   "Well, have you finished?" said Lizabetha Prokofievna to Evgenie.
   "Make haste, sir; it is time he went to bed. Have you more to say?" She was v
ery angry.
   "Yes, I have a little more," said Evgenie Pavlovitch, with a smile. "It seems
 to me that all you and your friends have said, Mr. Terentieff, and all you have
 just put forward with such undeniable talent, may be summed up in the triumph o
f right above all, independent of everything else, to the exclusion of everythin
g else; perhaps even before having discovered what constitutes the right. I may 
be mistaken?"
   "You are certainly mistaken; I do not even understand you. What else?"
   Murmurs arose in the neighbourhood of Burdovsky and his companions; Lebedeff'
s nephew protested under his breath.
   "I have nearly finished," replied Evgenie Pavlovitch.
   "I will only remark that from these premisses one could conclude that might i
s right-I mean the right of the clenched fist, and of personal inclination. Inde
ed, the world has often come to that conclusion. Prudhon upheld that might is ri
ght. In the American War some of the most advanced Liberals took sides with the 
planters on the score that the blacks were an inferior race to the whites, and t
hat might was the right of the white race."
   "Well?"
   "You mean, no doubt, that you do not deny that might is right?"
   "What then?"
   "You are at least logical. I would only point out that from the right of migh
t, to the right of tigers and crocodiles, or even Daniloff and Gorsky, is but a 
step."
   "I know nothing about that; what else?"
   Hippolyte was scarcely listening. He kept saying well?" and "what else?" mech
anically, without the least curiosity, and by mere force of habit.
   "Why, nothing else; that is all."
   "However, I bear you no grudge," said Hippolyte suddenly, and, hardly conscio
us of what he was doing, he held out his hand with a smile. The gesture took Evg
enie Pavlovitch by surprise, but with the utmost gravity he touched the hand tha
t was offered him in token of forgiveness.
   "I can but thank you," he said, in a tone too respectful to be sincere, "for 
your kindness in letting me speak, for I have often noticed that our Liberals ne
ver allow other people to have an opinion of their own, and immediately answer t
heir opponents with abuse, if they do not have recourse to arguments of a still 
more unpleasant nature."
   "What you say is quite true," observed General Epanchin; then, clasping his h
ands behind his back, he returned to his place on the terrace steps, where he ya
wned with an air of boredom.
   "Come, sir, that will do; you weary me," said Lizabetha Prokofievna suddenly 
to Evgenie Pavlovitch.
   Hippolyte rose all at once, looking troubled and almost frightened.
   "It is time for me to go," he said, glancing round in perplexity.
   "I have detained you I wanted to tell you everything I thought you all for the l
ast time it was a whim"
   He evidently had sudden fits of returning animation, when he awoke from his s
emi-delirium; then, recovering full selfpossession for a few moments, he would s
peak, in disconnected phrases which had perhaps haunted him for a long while on 
his bed of suffering, during weary, sleepless nights.
   "Well, good-bye," he said abruptly. "You think it is easy for me to say good-
bye to you? Ha, ha!"
   Feeling that his question was somewhat gauche, he smiled angrily.
   Then as if vexed that he could not ever express what he really meant, he said
 irritably, in a loud voice:
   "Excellency, I have the honour of inviting you to my funeral; that is, if you
 will deign to honour it with your presence. I invite you all, gentlemen, as wel
l as the general."
   He burst out laughing again, but it was the laughter of a madman.
   Lizabetha Prokofievna approached him anxiously and seized his arm. He stared 
at her for a moment, still laughing, but soon his face grew serious.
   "Do you know that I came here to see those trees?" pointing to the trees in t
he park. "It is not ridiculous, is it? Say that it is not ridiculous!" he demand
ed urgently of Lizabetha Prokofievna. Then he seemed to be plunged in thought. A
 moment later he raised his head, and his eyes sought for someone. He was lookin
g for Evgenie Pavlovitch, who was close by on his right as before, but he had fo
rgotten this, and his eyes ranged over the assembled company. "Ah! you have not 
gone!" he said, when he caught sight of him at last. "You kept on laughing just 
now, because I thought of speaking to the people from the window for a quarter o
f an hour. But I am not eighteen, you know; lying on that bed, and looking out o
f that window, I have thought of all sorts of things for such a long time that a 
dead man has no age, you know. I was saying that to myself only last week, when 
I was awake in the night. Do you know what you fear most? You fear our sincerity
 more than anything, although you despise us! The idea crossed my mind that nigh
t You thought I was making fun of you just now, Lizabetha Prokofievna? No, the id
ea of mockery was far from me; I only meant to praise you. Colia told me the pri
nce called you a child-very well-but let me see, I had something else to say" He 
covered his face with his hands and tried to collect his thoughts.
   "Ah, yes-you were going away just now, and I thought to myself: 'I shall neve
r see these people again-never again! This is the last time I shall see the tree
s, too. I shall see nothing after this but the red brick wall of Meyer's house o
pposite my window.
   Tell them about it-try to tell them,' I thought. 'Here is a beautiful young g
irl-you are a dead man; make them understand that. Tell them that a dead man may
 say anything-and Mrs. Grundy will not be angry-ha-ha! You are not laughing?" He
 looked anxiously around. "But you know I get so many queer ideas, lying there i
n bed. I have grown convinced that nature is full of mockery-you called me an at
heist just now, but you know this nature why are you laughing again? You are very
 cruel!" he added suddenly, regarding them all with mournful reproach. "I have n
ot corrupted Colia," he concluded in a different and very serious tone, as if re
membering something again.
   "Nobody here is laughing at you. Calm yourself" said Lizabetha Prokofievna, m
uch moved. "You shall see a new doctor tomorrow; the other was mistaken; but sit
 down, do not stand like that! You are delirious-Oh, what shall we do with him s
he cried in anguish, as she made him sit down again in the arm-chair.
   A tear glistened on her cheek. At the sight of it Hippolyte seemed amazed. He
 lifted his hand timidly and, touched the tear with his finger, smiling like a c
hild.
   "I you," he began joyfully. "You cannot tell how I he always spoke so enthusias
tically of you, Colia here; I liked his enthusiasm. I was not corrupting him! Bu
t I must leave him, too-I wanted to leave them all-there was not one of them-not
 one! I wanted to be a man of action-I had a right to be. Oh! what a lot of thin
gs I wanted! Now I want nothing; I renounce all my wants; I swore to myself that
 I would want nothing; let them seek the truth without me! Yes, nature is full o
f mockery! Why"-he continued with sudden warmth-"does she create the choicest be
ings only to mock at them? The only human being who is recognized as perfect, wh
en nature showed him to mankind, was given the mission to say things which have 
caused the shedding of so much blood that it would have drowned mankind if it ha
d all been shed at once! Oh! it is better for me to die! I should tell some drea
dful lie too; nature would so contrive it! I have corrupted nobody. I wanted to 
live for the happiness of all men, to find and spread the truth. I used to look 
out of my window at the wall of Meyer's house, and say to myself that if I could
 speak for a quarter of an hour I would convince the whole world, and now for on
ce in my life I have come into contact with you-if not with the others! And what 
is the result? Nothing! The sole result is that you despise me! Therefore I must
 be a fool, I am useless, it is time I disappeared! And I shall leave not even a
 memory! Not a sound, not a trace, not a single deed! I have not spread a single
 truth! Do not laugh at the fool! Forget him! Forget him forever! I beseech you, 
do not be so cruel as to remember! Do you know that if I were not consumptive, I
 would kill myself?"
   Though he seemed to wish to say much more, he became silent. He fell back int
o his chair, and, covering his face with his hands, began to sob like a little c
hild.
   "Oh! what on earth are we to do with him?" cried Lizabetha Prokofievna. She h
astened to him and pressed his head against her bosom, while he sobbed convulsiv
ely.
   "Come, come, come! There, you must not cry, that will do. You are a good chil
d! God will forgive you, because you knew no better.
   Come now, be a man! You know presently you will be ashamed."
   Hippolyte raised his head with an effort, saying:
   "I have little brothers and sisters, over there, poor avid innocent. She will
 corrupt them! You are a saint! You are a child yourself-save them! Snatch them 
from that she is it is shameful! Oh! help them! God will repay you a hundredfold. 
For the love of God, for the love of Christ!"
   "Speak, Ivan Fedorovitch! What are we to do?" cried Lizabetha Prokofievna, ir
ritably. "Please break your majestic silence! I tell you, if you cannot come to 
some decision, I will stay here all night myself. You have tyrannized over me en
ough, you autocrat!"
   She spoke angrily, and in great excitement, and expected an immediate reply. 
But in such a case, no matter how many are present, all prefer to keep silence: 
no one will take the initiative, but all reserve their comments till afterwards.
 There were some present-Varvara Ardalionovna, for instance-who would have willi
ngly sat there till morning without saying a word.
   Varvara had sat apart all the evening without opening her lips, but she liste
ned to everything with the closest attention; perhaps she had her reasons for so
 doing.
   "My dear," said the general, "it seems to me that a sick-nurse would be of mo
re use here than an excitable person like you.
   Perhaps it would be as well to get some sober, reliable man for the night. In
 any case we must consult the prince, and leave the patient to rest at once. Tom
orrow we can see what can be done for him."
   "It is nearly midnight; we are going. Will he come with us, or is he to stay 
here?" Doktorenko asked crossly of the prince.
   "You can stay with him if you like," said Muishkin.
   "There is plenty of room here."
   Suddenly, to the astonishment of all, Keller went quickly up to the general.
   "Excellency," he said, impulsively, "if you want a reliable man for the night
, I am ready to sacrifice myself for my friend-such a soul as he has! I have lon
g thought him a great man, excellency! My article showed my lack of education, b
ut when he criticizes he scatters pearls!"
   Ivan Fedorovitch turned from the boxer with a gesture of despair.
   "I shall be delighted if he will stay; it would certainly be difficult for hi
m to get back to Petersburg," said the prince, in answer to the eager questions 
of Lizabetha Prokofievna.
   "But you are half asleep, are you not? If you don't want him, I will take him
 back to my house! Why, good gracious! He can hardly stand up himself! What is i
t? Are you ill?"
   Not finding the prince on his death-bed, Lizabetha Prokofievna had been misle
d by his appearance to think him much better than he was. But his recent illness
, the painful memories attached to it, the fatigue of this evening, the incident
 with "Pavlicheff's son," and now this scene with Hippolyte, had all so worked o
n his oversensitive nature that he was now almost in a fever. Moreover, anew tro
uble, almost a fear, showed itself in his eyes; he watched Hippolyte anxiously a
s if expecting something further.
   Suddenly Hippolyte arose. His face, shockingly pale, was that of a man overwh
elmed with shame and despair. This was shown chiefly in the look of fear and hat
red which he cast upon the assembled company, and in the wild smile upon his tre
mbling lips. Then he cast down his eyes, and with the same smile, staggered towa
rds Burdovsky and Doktorenko, who stood at the entrance to the verandah. He had 
decided to go with them.
   "There! that is what I feared!" cried the prince. "It was inevitable!"
   Hippolyte turned upon him, a prey to maniacal rage, which set all the muscles
 of his face quivering.
   "Ah! that is what you feared! It was inevitable, you say! Well, let me tell y
ou that if I hate anyone here-I hate you all," he cried, in a hoarse, strained v
oice-" but you, you, with your jesuitical soul, your soul of sickly sweetness, i
diot, beneficent millionaire-I hate you worse than anything or anyone on earth! 
I saw through you and hated you long ago; from the day I first heard of you. I h
ated you with my whole heart. You have contrived all this! You have driven me in
to this state! You have made a dying man disgrace himself. You, you, you are the
 cause of my abject cowardice! I would kill you if I remained alive! I do not wa
nt your benefits; I will accept none from anyone; do you hear?
   Not from any one! I want nothing! I was delirious, do not dare to triumph! I 
curse every one of you, once for all!"
   Breath failed him here, and he was obliged to stop.
   "He is ashamed of his tears!" whispered Lebedeff to Lizabetha Prokofievna. "I
t was inevitable. Ah! what a wonderful man the prince is! He read his very soul.
"
   But Mrs. Epanchin would not deign to look at Lebedeff. Drawn up haughtily, wi
th her head held high, she gazed at the "riff-raff," with scornful curiosity. Wh
en Hippolyte had finished, Ivan Fedorovitch shrugged his shoulders, and his wife
 looked him angrily up and down, as if to demand the meaning of his movement.
   Then she turned to the prince.
   "Thanks, prince, many thanks, eccentric friend of the family, for the pleasan
t evening you have provided for us. I am sure you are quite pleased that you hav
e managed to mix us up with your extraordinary affairs. It is quite enough, dear
 family friend; thank you for giving us an opportunity of getting to know you so
 well."
   She arranged her cloak with hands that trembled with anger as she waited for 
the "riff-raff "to go. The cab which Lebedeff's son had gone to fetch a quarter 
of an hour ago, by Doktorenko's order, arrived at that moment. The general thoug
ht fit to put in a word after his wife.
   "Really, prince, I hardly expected after-after all our friendly intercourse- 
and you see, Lizabetha Prokofievna-"
   "Papa, how can you?" cried Adelaida, walking quickly up to the prince and hol
ding out her hand.
   He smiled absently at her; then suddenly he felt a burning sensation in his e
ar as an angry voice whispered:
   "If you do not turn those dreadful people out of the house this very instant,
 I shall hate you all my life-all my life!" It was Aglaya. She seemed almost in 
a frenzy, but she turned away before the prince could look at her. However, ther
e was no one left to turn out of the house, for they had managed meanwhile to ge
t Hippolyte into the cab, and it had driven off.
   "Well, how much longer is this going to last, Ivan Fedorovitch?
   What do you think? Shall I soon be delivered from these odious youths?"
   "My dear, I am quite ready; naturally the prince."
   Ivan Fedorovitch held out his hand to Muishkin, but ran after his wife, who w
as leaving with every sign of violent indignation, before he had time to shake i
t. Adelaida, her fiance, and Alexandra, said good-bye to their host with sincere
 friendliness.
   Evgenie Pavlovitch did the same, and he alone seemed in good spirits.
   "What I expected has happened! But I am sorry, you poor fellow, that you shou
ld have had to suffer for it," he murmured, with a most charming smile.
   Aglaya left without saying good-bye. But the evening was not to end without a
 last adventure. An unexpected meeting was yet in store for Lizabetha Prokofievn
a.
   She had scarcely descended the terrace steps leading to the high road that sk
irts the park at Pavlofsk, when suddenly there dashed by a smart open carriage, 
drawn by a pair of beautiful white horses. Having passed some ten yards beyond t
he house, the carriage suddenly drew up, and one of the two ladies seated in it 
turned sharp round as though she had just caught sight of some acquaintance whom
 she particularly wished to see.
   "Evgenie Pavlovitch! Is that you?" cried a clear, sweet voice, which caused t
he prince, and perhaps someone else, to tremble.
   "Well, I AM glad I've found you at last! I've sent to town for you twice toda
y myself! My messengers have been searching for you everywhere!"
   Evgenie Pavlovitch stood on the steps like one struck by lightning. Mrs. Epan
chin stood still too, but not with the petrified expression of Evgenie. She gaze
d haughtily at the audacious person who had addressed her companion, and then tu
rned a look of astonishment upon Evgenie himself.
   "There's news!" continued the clear voice. "You need not be anxious about Kup
ferof's IOU's-Rogojin has bought them up. I persuaded him to!-I dare say we shal
l settle Biscup too, so it's all right, you see! Au revoir, tomorrow! And don't 
worry!" The carriage moved on, and disappeared.
   "The woman's mad!" cried Evgenie, at last, crimson with anger, and looking co
nfusedly around. "I don't know what she's talking about! What IOU's? Who is she?
" Mrs. Epanchin continued to watch his face for a couple of seconds; then she ma
rched briskly and haughtily away towards her own house, the rest following her.
   A minute afterwards, Evgenie Pavlovitch reappeared on the terrace, in great a
gitation.
   "Prince," he said, "tell me the truth; do you know what all this means?"
   "I know nothing whatever about it!" replied the latter, who was, himself, in 
a state of nervous excitement.
   "No?"
   "No?
   "Well, nor do I!" said Evgenie Pavlovitch, laughing suddenly. "I haven't the 
slightest knowledge of any such IOU's as she mentioned, I swear I haven't-What's
 the matter, are you fainting?"
   "Oh, no-no-I'm all right, I assure you!"
      XI.
   THE anger of the Epanchin family was unappeased for three days.
   As usual the prince reproached himself, and had expected punishment, but he w
as inwardly convinced that Lizabetha Prokofievna could not be seriously angry wi
th him, and that she probably was more angry with herself. He was painfully surp
rised, therefore, when three days passed with no word from her. Other things als
o troubled and perplexed him, and one of these grew more important in his eyes a
s the days went by. He had begun to blame himself for two opposite tendencies-on
 the one hand to extreme, almost "senseless," confidence in his fellows, on the 
other to a "vile, gloomy suspiciousness."
   By the end of the third day the incident of the eccentric lady and Evgenie Pa
vlovitch had attained enormous and mysterious proportions in his mind. He sorrow
fully asked himself whether he had been the cause of this new "monstrosity," or 
was it but he refrained from saying who else might be in fault. As for the letter
s N.P.B., he looked on that as a harmless joke, a mere childish piece of mischie
f-so childish that he felt it would be shameful, almost dishonourable, to attach
 any importance to it.
   The day after these scandalous events, however, the prince had the honour of 
receiving a visit from Adelaida and her fiance, Prince S. They came, ostensibly,
 to inquire after his health.
   They had wandered out for a walk, and called in "by accident," and talked for
 almost the whole of the time they were with him about a certain most lovely tre
e in the park, which Adelaida had set her heart upon for a picture. This, and a 
little amiable conversation on Prince S.'s part, occupied the time, and not a wo
rd was said about last evening's episodes. At length Adelaida burst out laughing
, apologized, and explained that they had come incognito; from which, and from t
he circumstance that they said nothing about the prince's either walking back wi
th them or coming to see them later on, the latter inferred that he was in Mrs. 
Epanchin's black books. Adelaida mentioned a watercolour that she would much lik
e to show him, and explained that she would either send it by Colia, or bring it
 herself the next day-which to the prince seemed very suggestive.
   At length, however, just as the visitors were on the point of departing, Prin
ce S. seemed suddenly to recollect himself. "Oh yes, by-the-by," he said, "do yo
u happen to know, my dear Lef Nicolaievitch, who that lady was who called out to
 Evgenie Pavlovitch last night, from the carriage?"
   "It was Nastasia Philipovna," said the prince; "didn't you know that? I canno
t tell you who her companion was."
   "But what on earth did she mean? I assure you it is a real riddle to me-to me
, and to others, too!" Prince S. seemed to be under the influence of sincere ast
onishment.
   "She spoke of some bills of Evgenie Pavlovitch's," said the prince, simply, "
which Rogojin had bought up from someone; and implied that Rogojin would not pre
ss him."
   "Oh, I heard that much, my dear fellow! But the thing is so impossibly absurd
! A man of property like Evgenie to give IOU's to a money-lender, and to be worr
ied about them! It is ridiculous. Besides, he cannot possibly be on such intimat
e terms with Nastasia Philipovna as she gave us to understand; that's the princi
pal part of the mystery! He has given me his word that he knows nothing whatever
 about the matter, and of course I believe him. Well, the question is, my dear p
rince, do you know anything about it? Has any sort of suspicion of the meaning o
f it come across you?"
   "No, I know nothing whatever about it. I assure you I had nothing at all to d
o with it."
   "Oh, prince, how strange you have become! I assure you, I hardly know you for
 your old self. How can you suppose that I ever suggested you could have had a f
inger in such a business? But you are not quite yourself today, I can see." He e
mbraced the prince, and kissed him.
   "What do you mean, though," asked Muishkin, "'by such a business'? I don't se
e any particular 'business' about it at all!"
   "Oh, undoubtedly, this person wished somehow, and for some reason, to do Evge
nie Pavlovitch a bad turn, by attributing to him-before witnesses-qualities whic
h he neither has nor can have," replied Prince S. drily enough.
   Muiskhin looked disturbed, but continued to gaze intently and questioningly i
nto Prince S.'s face. The latter, however, remained silent.
   "Then it was not simply a matter of bills?" Muishkin said at last, with some 
impatience. "It was not as she said?"
   "But I ask you, my dear sir, how can there be anything in common between Evge
nie Pavlovitch, and-her, and again Rogojin? I tell you he is a man of immense we
alth-as I know for a fact; and he has further expectations from his uncle. Simpl
y Nastasia Philipovna-"
   Prince S. paused, as though unwilling to continue talking about Nastasia Phil
ipovna.
   "Then at all events he knows her!" remarked the prince, after a moment's sile
nce.
   "Oh, that may be. He may have known her some time ago-two or three years, at 
least. He used to know Totski. But it is impossible that there should be any int
imacy between them. She has not even been in the place-many people don't even kn
ow that she has returned from Moscow! I have only observed her carriage about fo
r the last three days or so."
   "It's a lovely carriage," said Adelaida.
   "Yes, it was a beautiful turn-out, certainly!"
   The visitors left the house, however, on no less friendly terms than before. 
But the visit was of the greatest importance to the prince, from his own point o
f view. Admitting that he had his suspicions, from the moment of the occurrence 
of last night, perhaps even before, that Nastasia had some mysterious end in vie
w, yet this visit confirmed his suspicions and justified his fears. It was all c
lear to him; Prince S. was wrong, perhaps, in his view of the matter, but he was
 somewhere near the truth, and was right in so far as that he understood there t
o be an intrigue of some sort going on. Perhaps Prince S. saw it all more clearl
y than he had allowed his hearers to understand. At all events, nothing could be
 plainer than that he and Adelaida had come for the express purpose of obtaining
 explanations, and that they suspected him of being concerned in the affair. And
 if all this were so, then SHE must have some terrible object in view! What was 
it? There was no stopping HER, as Muishkin knew from experience, in the performa
nce of anything she had set her mind on! "Oh, she is mad, mad!" thought the poor
 prince.
   But there were many other puzzling occurrences that day, which required immed
iate explanation, and the prince felt very sad. A visit from Vera Lebedeff distr
acted him a little. She brought the infant Lubotchka with her as usual, and talk
ed cheerfully for some time. Then came her younger sister, and later the brother
, who attended a school close by. He informed Muishkin that his father had latel
y found a new interpretation of the star called "wormwood," which fell upon the 
water-springs, as described in the Apocalypse. He had decided that it meant the 
network of railroads spread over the face of Europe at the present time. The pri
nce refused to believe that Lebedeff could have given such an interpretation, an
d they decided to ask him about it at the earliest opportunity. Vera related how
 Keller had taken up his abode with them on the previous evening. She thought he
 would remain for some time, as he was greatly pleased with the society of Gener
al Ivolgin and of the whole family. But he declared that he had only come to the
m in order to complete his education!
   The prince always enjoyed the company of Lebedeff's children, and today it wa
s especially welcome, for Colia did not appear all day. Early that morning he ha
d started for Petersburg. Lebedeff also was away on business. But Gavrila Ardali
onovitch had promised to visit Muishkin, who eagerly awaited his coming.
   About seven in the evening, soon after dinner, he arrived. At the first glanc
e it struck the prince that he, at any rate, must know all the details of last n
ight's affair. Indeed, it would have been impossible for him to remain in ignora
nce considering the intimate relationship between him, Varvara Ardalionovna, and
 Ptitsin. But although he and the prince were intimate, in a sense, and although
 the latter had placed the Burdovsky affair in his hands-and this was not the on
ly mark of confidence he had received-it seemed curious how many matters there w
ere that were tacitly avoided in their conversations. Muishkin thought that Gani
a at times appeared to desire more cordiality and frankness.
   It was apparent now, when he entered, that he, was convinced that the moment 
for breaking the ice between them had come at last.
   But all the same Gania was in haste, for his sister was waiting at Lebedeff's
 to consult him on an urgent matter of business. If he had anticipated impatient
 questions, or impulsive confidences, he was soon undeceived. The prince was tho
ughtful, reserved, even a little absent-minded, and asked none of the questions-
one in particular-that Gania had expected. So he imitated the prince's demeanour
, and talked fast and brilliantly upon all subjects but the one on which their t
houghts were engaged. Among other things Gania told his host that Nastasia Phili
povna had been only four days in Pavlofsk, and that everyone was talking about h
er already. She was staying with Daria Alexeyevna, in an ugly little house in Ma
ttrossky Street, but drove about in the smartest carriage in the place. A crowd 
of followers had pursued her from the first, young and old. Some escorted her on
 horse-back when she took the air in her carriage.
   She was as capricious as ever in the choice of her acquaintances, and admitte
d few into her narrow circle. Yet she already had a numerous following and many 
champions on whom she could depend in time of need. One gentleman on his holiday
 had broken off his engagement on her account, and an old general had quarrelled
 with his only son for the same reason.
   She was accompanied sometimes in her carriage by a girl of sixteen, a distant
 relative of her hostess. This young lady sang very well; in fact, her music had
 given a kind of notoriety to their little house. Nastasia, however, was behavin
g with great discretion on the whole. She dressed quietly, though with such tast
e as to drive all the ladies in Pavlofsk mad with envy, of that, as well as of h
er beauty and her carriage and horses.
   "As for yesterday's episode," continued Gania, "of course it was pre-arranged
." Here he paused, as though expecting to be asked how he knew that. But the pri
nce did not inquire. Concerning Evgenie Pavlovitch, Gania stated, without being 
asked, that he believed the former had not known Nastasia Philipovna in past yea
rs, but that he had probably been introduced to her by somebody in the park duri
ng these four days. As to the question of the IOU's she had spoken of, there mig
ht easily be something in that; for though Evgenie was undoubtedly a man of weal
th, yet certain of his affairs were equally undoubtedly in disorder.
   Arrived at this interesting point, Gania suddenly broke off, and said no more
 about Nastasia's prank of the previous evening.
   At last Varvara Ardalionovna came in search of her brother, and remained for 
a few minutes. Without Muishkin's asking her, she informed him that Evgenie Pavl
ovitch was spending the day in Petersburg, and perhaps would remain there over t
omorrow; and that her husband had also gone to town, probably in connection with
 Evgenie Pavlovitch's affairs.
   "Lizabetha Prokofievna is in a really fiendish temper today," she added, as s
he went out, "but the most curious thing is that Aglaya has quarrelled with her 
whole family; not only with her father and mother, but with her sisters also. It
 is not a good sign." She said all this quite casually, though it was extremely 
important in the eyes of the prince, and went off with her brother. Regarding th
e episode of "Pavlicheff's son," Gania had been absolutely silent, partly from a
 kind of false modesty, partly, perhaps, to "spare the prince's feelings." The l
atter, however, thanked him again for the trouble he had taken in the affair.
   Muishkin was glad enough to be left alone. He went out of the garden, crossed
 the road, and entered the park. He wished to reflect, and to make up his mind a
s to a certain "step." This step was one of those things, however, which are not
 thought out, as a rule, but decided for or against hastily, and without much re
flection. The fact is, he felt a longing to leave all this and go away-go anywhe
re, if only it were far enough, and at once, without bidding farewell to anyone.
 He felt a presentiment that if he remained but a few days more in this place, a
nd among these people, he would be fixed there irrevocably and permanently.
   However, in a very few minutes he decided that to run away was impossible; th
at it would be cowardly; that great problems lay before him, and that he had no 
right to leave them unsolved, or at least to refuse to give all his energy and s
trength to the attempt to solve them. Having come to this determination, he turn
ed and went home, his walk having lasted less than a quarter of an hour. At that
 moment he was thoroughly unhappy.
   Lebedeff had not returned, so towards evening Keller managed to penetrate int
o the prince's apartments. He was not drunk, but in a confidential and talkative
 mood. He announced that he had come to tell the story of his life to Muishkin, 
and had only remained at Pavlofsk for that purpose. There was no means of turnin
g him out; nothing short of an earthquake would have removed him.
   In the manner of one with long hours before him, he began his history; but af
ter a few incoherent words he jumped to the conclusion, which was that "having c
eased to believe in God Almighty, he had lost every vestige of morality, and had
 gone so far as to commit a theft." "Could you imagine such a thing?" said he.
   "Listen to me, Keller," returned the prince. "If I were in your place, I shou
ld not acknowledge that unless it were absolutely necessary for some reason. But
 perhaps you are making yourself out to be worse than you are, purposely?"
   "I should tell it to no one but yourself, prince, and I only name it now as a
 help to my soul's evolution. When I die, that secret will die with me! But, exc
ellency, if you knew, if you only had the least idea, how difficult it is to get
 money nowadays! Where to find it is the question. Ask for a loan, the answer is
 always the same: 'Give us gold, jewels, or diamonds, and it will be quite easy.
' Exactly what one has not got! Can you picture that to yourself? I got angry at
 last, and said, 'I suppose you would accept emeralds?' 'Certainly, we accept em
eralds with pleasure.
   Yes!' 'Well, that's all right,' said I. 'Go to the devil, you den of thieves!
' And with that I seized my hat, and walked out."
   "Had you any emeralds?" asked the prince.
   "What? I have emeralds? Oh, prince! with what simplicity, with what almost pa
storal simplicity, you look upon life!"
   Could not something be made of this man under good influences? asked the prin
ce of himself, for he began to feel a kind of pity for his visitor. He thought l
ittle of the value of his own personal influence, not from a sense of humility, 
but from his peculiar way of looking at things in general. Imperceptibly the con
versation grew more animated and more interesting, so that neither of the two fe
lt anxious to bring it to a close. Keller confessed, with apparent sincerity, to
 having been guilty of many acts of such a nature that it astonished the prince 
that he could mention them, even to him. At every fresh avowal he professed the 
deepest repentance, and described himself as being "bathed in tears"; but this d
id not prevent him from putting on a boastful air at times, and some of his stor
ies were so absurdly comical that both he and the prince laughed like madmen.
   "One point in your favour is that you seem to have a child-like mind, and ext
reme truthfulness," said the prince at last. "Do you know that that atones for m
uch?"
   "I am assuredly noble-minded, and chivalrous to a degree!" said Keller, much 
softened. "But, do you know, this nobility of mind exists in a dream, if one may
 put it so? It never appears in practice or deed. Now, why is that? I can never 
understand."
   "Do not despair. I think we may say without fear of deceiving ourselves, that
 you have now given a fairly exact account of your life. I, at least, think it w
ould be impossible to add much to what you have just told me."
   "Impossible?" cried Keller, almost pityingly. "Oh prince, how little you real
ly seem to understand human nature!"
   "Is there really much more to be added?" asked the prince, with mild surprise
. "Well, what is it you really want of me? Speak out; tell me why you came to ma
ke your confession to me?"
   "What did I want? Well, to begin with, it is good to meet a man like you. It 
is a pleasure to talk over my faults with you. I know you for one of the best of
 men and then then"
   He hesitated, and appeared so much embarrassed that the prince helped him out
.
   "Then you wanted me to lend you money?"
   The words were spoken in a grave tone, and even somewhat shyly.
   Keller started, gave an astonished look at the speaker, and thumped the table
 with his fist.
   "Well, prince, that's enough to knock me down! It astounds me!
   Here you are, as simple and innocent as a knight of the golden age, and yet ye
t you read a man's soul like a psychologist! Now, do explain it to me, prince, be
cause I I really do not understand! Of course, my aim was to borrow money all alon
g, and you you asked the question as if there was nothing blameable in it-as if y
ou thought it quite natural."
   "Yes from you it is quite natural."
   "And you are not offended?"
   "Why should I be offended?"
   "Well, just listen, prince. I remained here last evening, partly because I ha
ve a great admiration for the French archbishop Bourdaloue. I enjoyed a discussi
on over him till three o'clock in the morning, with Lebedeff; and then then-I swe
ar by all I hold sacred that I am telling you the truth-then I wished to develop
 my soul in this frank and heartfelt confession to you. This was my thought as I
 was sobbing myself to sleep at dawn. Just as I was losing consciousness, tears 
in my soul, tears on my face (I remember how I lay there sobbing), an idea from 
hell struck me. 'Why not, after confessing, borrow money from him?' You see, thi
s confession was a kind of masterstroke; I intended to use it as a means to your
 good grace and favour-and then-then I meant to walk off with a hundred and fift
y roubles. Now, do you not call that base?"
   "It is hardly an exact statement of the case," said the prince in reply. "You
 have confused your motives and ideas, as I need scarcely say too often happens 
to myself. I can assure you, Keller, I reproach myself bitterly for it sometimes
. When you were talking just now I seemed to be listening to something about mys
elf. At times I have imagined that all men were the same," he continued earnestl
y, for he appeared to be much interested in the conversation, "and that consoled
 me in a certain degree, for a DOUBLE motive is a thing most difficult to fight 
against. I have tried, and I know. God knows whence they arise, these ideas that
 you speak of as base. I fear these double motives more than ever just now, but 
I am not your judge, and in my opinion it is going too far to give the name of b
aseness to it-what do you think?
   You were going to employ your tears as a ruse in order to borrow money, but y
ou also say-in fact, you have sworn to the fact-that independently of this your 
confession was made with an honourable motive. As for the money, you want it for
 drink, do you not? After your confession, that is weakness, of course; but, aft
er all, how can anyone give up a bad habit at a moment's notice? It is impossibl
e. What can we do? It is best, I think, to leave the matter to your own conscien
ce. How does it seem to you?" As he concluded the prince looked curiously at Kel
ler; evidently this problem of double motives had often been considered by him b
efore.
   "Well, how anybody can call you an idiot after that, is more than I can under
stand!" cried the boxer.
   The prince reddened slightly.
   "Bourdaloue, the archbishop, would not have spared a man like me," Keller con
tinued, "but you, you have judged me with humanity. To show how grateful I am, a
nd as a punishment, I will not accept a hundred and fifty roubles. Give me twent
y-five-that will be enough; it is all I really need, for a fortnight at least. I
 will not ask you for more for a fortnight. I should like to have given Agatha a
 present, but she does not really deserve it. Oh, my dear prince, God bless you!
"
   At this moment Lebedeff appeared, having just arrived from Petersburg. He fro
wned when he saw the twenty-five rouble note in Keller's hand, but the latter, h
aving got the money, went away at once. Lebedeff began to abuse him.
   "You are unjust; I found him sincerely repentant," observed the prince, after
 listening for a time.
   "What is the good of repentance like that? It is the same exactly as mine yes
terday, when I said, 'I am base, I am base,'-words, and nothing more!"
   "Then they were only words on your part? I thought, on the contrary"
   "Well, I don't mind telling you the truth-you only! Because you see through a
 man somehow. Words and actions, truth and falsehood, are all jumbled up togethe
r in me, and yet I am perfectly sincere. I feel the deepest repentance, believe 
it or not, as you choose; but words and lies come out in the infernal craving to
 get the better of other people. It is always there-the notion of cheating peopl
e, and of using my repentant tears to my own advantage! I assure you this is the
 truth, prince! I would not tell any other man for the world! He would laugh and
 jeer at me-but you, you judge a man humanely."
   "Why, Keller said the same thing to me nearly word for word a few minutes ago
!" cried Muishkin. "And you both seem inclined to boast about it! You astonish m
e, but I think he is more sincere than you, for you make a regular trade of it. 
Oh, don't put on that pathetic expression, and don't put your hand on your heart
!
   Have you anything to say to me? You have not come for nothing"
   Lebedeff grinned and wriggled.
   "I have been waiting all day for you, because I want to ask you a question; a
nd, for once in your life, please tell me the truth at once. Had you anything to
 do with that affair of the carriage yesterday?"
   Lebedeff began to grin again, rubbed his hands, sneezed, but spoke not a word
 in reply.
   "I see you had something to do with it."
   "Indirectly, quite indirectly! I am speaking the truth-I am indeed! I merely 
told a certain person that I had people in my house, and that such and such pers
onages might be found among them."
   "I am aware that you sent your son to that house-he told me so himself just n
ow, but what is this intrigue?" said the prince, impatiently.
   "It is not my intrigue!" cried Lebedeff, waving his hand.
   "It was engineered by other people, and is, properly speaking, rather a fanta
sy than an intrigue!"
   "But what is it all about? Tell me, for Heaven's sake! Cannot you understand 
how nearly it touches me? Why are they blackening Evgenie Pavlovitch's reputatio
n?"
   Lebedeff grimaced and wriggled again.
   "Prince!" said he. "Excellency! You won't let me tell you the whole truth; I 
have tried to explain; more than once I have begun, but you have not allowed me 
to go on"
   The prince gave no answer, and sat deep in thought. Evidently he was struggli
ng to decide.
   "Very well! Tell me the truth," he said, dejectedly.
   "Aglaya Ivanovna" began Lebedeff, promptly.
   "Be silent! At once!" interrupted the prince, red with indignation, and perha
ps with shame, too. "It is impossible and absurd! All that has been invented by 
you, or fools like you! Let me never hear you say a word again on that subject!"
   Late in the evening Colia came in with a whole budget of Petersburg and Pavlo
fsk news. He did not dwell much on the Petersburg part of it, which consisted ch
iefly of intelligence about his friend Hippolyte, but passed quickly to the Pavl
ofsk tidings. He had gone straight to the Epanchins' from the station.
   "There's the deuce and all going on there!" he said. "First of all about the 
row last night, and I think there must be something new as well, though I didn't
 like to ask. Not a word about YOU, prince, the whole time!" The most interestin
g fact was that Aglaya had been quarrelling with her people about Gania. Colia d
id not know any details, except that it had been a terrible quarrel! Also Evgeni
e Pavlovitch had called, and met with an excellent reception all round. And anot
her curious thing: Mrs.
   Epanchin was so angry that she called Varia to her-Varia was talking to the g
irls-and turned her out of the house "once for all "she said. "I heard it from V
aria herself-Mrs. Epanchin was quite polite, but firm; and when Varia said good-
bye to the girls, she told them nothing about it, and they didn't know they were
 saying goodbye for the last time. I'm sorry for Varia, and for Gania too; he is
n't half a bad fellow, in spite of his faults, and I shall never forgive myself 
for not liking him before! I don't know whether I ought to continue to go to the
 Epanchins' now," concluded Colia-" I like to be quite independent of others, an
d of other people's quarrels if I can; but I must think over it."
   "I don't think you need break your heart over Gania," said the prince; "for i
f what you say is true, he must be considered dangerous in the Epanchin househol
d, and if so, certain hopes of his must have been encouraged."
   "What? What hopes?" cried Colia; "you surely don't mean Aglaya?-oh, no!-"
   "You're a dreadful sceptic, prince," he continued, after a moment's silence. 
"I have observed of late that you have grown sceptical about everything. You don
't seem to believe in people as you did, and are always attributing motives and 
so on-am I using the word 'sceptic' in its proper sense?"
   "I believe so; but I'm not sure."
   "Well, I'll change it, right or wrong; I'll say that you are not sceptical, b
ut JEALOUS. There! you are deadly jealous of Gania, over a certain proud damsel!
 Come!" Colia jumped up, with these words, and burst out laughing. He laughed as
 he had perhaps never laughed before, and still more when he saw the prince flus
hing up to his temples. He was delighted that the prince should be jealous about
 Aglaya. However, he stopped immediately on seeing that the other was really hur
t, and the conversation continued, very earnestly, for an hour or more.
   Next day the prince had to go to town, on business. Returning in the afternoo
n, he happened upon General Epanchin at the station.
   The latter seized his hand, glancing around nervously, as if he were afraid o
f being caught in wrong-doing, and dragged him into a first-class compartment. H
e was burning to speak about something of importance.
   "In the first place, my dear prince, don't be angry with me. I would have com
e to see you yesterday, but I didn't know how Lizabetha Prokofievna would take i
t. My dear fellow, my house is simply a hell just now, a sort of sphinx has take
n up its abode there. We live in an atmosphere of riddles; I can't make head or 
tail of anything. As for you, I feel sure you are the least to blame of any of u
s, though you certainly have been the cause of a good deal of trouble. You see, 
it's all very pleasant to be a philanthropist; but it can be carried too far. Of
 course I admire kind-heartedness, and I esteem my wife, but-"
   The general wandered on in this disconnected way for a long time; it was clea
r that he was much disturbed by some circumstance which he could make nothing of
.
   "It is plain to me, that YOU are not in it at all," he continued, at last, a 
little less vaguely, "but perhaps you had better not come to our house for a lit
tle while. I ask you in the friendliest manner, mind; just till the wind changes
 again. As for Evgenie Pavlovitch," he continued with some excitement, "the whol
e thing is a calumny, a dirty calumny. It is simply a plot, an intrigue, to upse
t our plans and to stir up a quarrel. You see, prince, I'll tell you privately, 
Evgenie and ourselves have not said a word yet, we have no formal understanding,
 we are in no way bound on either side, but the word may be said very soon, don'
t you see, VERY soon, and all this is most injurious, and is meant to be so. Why
? I'm sure I can't tell you. She's an extraordinary woman, you see, an eccentric
 woman; I tell you I am so frightened of that woman that I can't sleep. What a c
arriage that was, and where did it come from, eh? I declare, I was base enough t
o suspect Evgenie at first; but it seems certain that that cannot be the case, a
nd if so, why is she interfering here?
   That's the riddle, what does she want? Is it to keep Evgenie to herself? But,
 my dear fellow, I swear to you, I swear he doesn't even KNOW her, and as for th
ose bills, why, the whole thing is an invention! And the familiarity of the woma
n! It's quite clear we must treat the impudent creature's attempt with disdain, 
and redouble our courtesy towards Evgenie. I told my wife so.
   "Now I'll tell you my secret conviction. I'm certain that she's doing this to
 revenge herself on me, on account of the past, though I assure you that all the
 time I was blameless. I blush at the very idea. And now she turns up again like
 this, when I thought she had finally disappeared! Where's Rogojin all this time
? I thought she was Mrs. Rogojin, long ago."
   The old man was in a state of great mental perturbation. The whole of the jou
rney, which occupied nearly an hour, he continued in this strain, putting questi
ons and answering them himself, shrugging his shoulders, pressing the prince's h
and, and assuring the latter that, at all events, he had no suspicion whatever o
f HIM. This last assurance was satisfactory, at all events. The general finished
 by informing him that Evgenie's uncle was head of one of the civil service depa
rtments, and rich, very rich, and a gourmand. "And, well, Heaven preserve him, o
f course-but Evgenie gets his money, don't you see? But, for all this, I'm uncom
fortable, I don't know why. There's something in the air, I feel there's somethi
ng nasty in the air, like a bat, and I'm by no means comfortable."
   And it was not until the third day that the formal reconciliation between the
 prince and the Epanchins took place, as said before.
      XII.
   IT was seven in the evening, and the prince was just preparing to go out for 
a walk in the park, when suddenly Mrs. Epanchin appeared on the terrace.
   "In the first place, don't dare to suppose," she began, "that I am going to a
pologize. Nonsense! You were entirely to blame."
   The prince remained silent.
   "Were you to blame, or not?"
   "No, certainly not, no more than yourself, though at first I thought I was."
   "Oh, very well, let's sit down, at all events, for I don't intend to stand up
 all day. And remember, if you say, one word about 'mischievous urchins,' I shal
l go away and break with you altogether. Now then, did you, or did you not, send
 a letter to Aglaya, a couple of months or so ago, about Easter-tide?"
   "Yes!"
   "What for? What was your object? Show me the letter." Mrs.
   Epanchin's eyes flashed; she was almost trembling with impatience.
   "I have not got the letter," said the prince, timidly, extremely surprised at
 the turn the conversation had taken. "If anyone has it, if it still exists, Agl
aya Ivanovna must have it."
   "No finessing, please. What did you write about?"
   "I am not finessing, and I am not in the least afraid of telling you; but I d
on't see the slightest reason why I should not have written."
   "Be quiet, you can talk afterwards! What was the letter about?
   Why are you blushing?"
   The prince was silent. At last he spoke.
   "I don't understand your thoughts, Lizabetha Prokofievna; but I can see that 
the fact of my having written is for some reason repugnant to you. You must admi
t that I have a perfect right to refuse to answer your questions; but, in order 
to show you that I am neither ashamed of the letter, nor sorry that I wrote it, 
and that I am not in the least inclined to blush about it "(here the prince's bl
ushes redoubled), "I will repeat the substance of my letter, for I think I know 
it almost by heart."
   So saying, the prince repeated the letter almost word for word, as he had wri
tten it.
   "My goodness, what utter twaddle, and what may all this nonsense have signifi
ed, pray? If it had any meaning at all!" said Mrs.
   Epanchin, cuttingly, after having listened with great attention.
   "I really don't absolutely know myself; I know my feeling was very sincere. I
 had moments at that time full of life and hope."
   "What sort of hope?"
   "It is difficult to explain, but certainly not the hopes you have in your min
d. Hopes-well, in a word, hopes for the future, and a feeling of joy that THERE,
 at all events, I was not entirely a stranger and a foreigner. I felt an ecstasy
 in being in my native land once more; and one sunny morning I took up a pen and
 wrote her that letter, but why to HER, I don't quite know. Sometimes one longs 
to have a friend near, and I evidently felt the need of one then," added the pri
nce, and paused.
   "Are you in love with her?"
   "N-no! I wrote to her as to a sister; I signed myself her brother."
   "Oh yes, of course, on purpose! I quite understand."
   "It is very painful to me to answer these questions, Lizabetha Prokofievna."
   "I dare say it is; but that's no affair of mine. Now then, assure me truly as
 before Heaven, are you lying to me or not?"
   "No, I am not lying."
   "Are you telling the truth when you say you are not in love?"
   "I believe it is the absolute truth."
   "'I believe,' indeed! Did that mischievous urchin give it to her?"
   "I asked Nicolai Ardalionovitch"
   "The urchin! the urchin!" interrupted Lizabetha Prokofievna in an angry voice
. "I do not want to know if it were Nicolai Ardalionovitch! The urchin!"
   "Nicolai Ardalionovitch"
   "The urchin, I tell you!"
   "No, it was not the urchin: it was Nicolai Ardalionovitch," said the prince v
ery firmly, but without raising his voice.
   "Well, all right! All right, my dear! I shall put that down to your account."
   She was silent a moment to get breath, and to recover her composure.
   "Well!-and what's the meaning of the 'poor knight,' eh?"
   "I don't know in the least; I wasn't present when the joke was made. It IS a 
joke. I suppose, and that's all."
   "Well, that's a comfort, at all events. You don't suppose she could take any 
interest in you, do you? Why, she called you an 'idiot' herself."
   "I think you might have spared me that," murmured the prince reproachfully, a
lmost in a whisper.
   "Don't be angry; she is a wilful, mad, spoilt girl. If she likes a person she
 will pitch into him, and chaff him. I used to be just such another. But for all
 that you needn't flatter yourself, my boy; she is not for you. I don't believe 
it, and it is not to be. I tell you so at once, so that you may take proper prec
autions. Now, I want to hear you swear that you are not married to that woman?"
   "Lizabetha Prokofievna, what are you thinking of?" cried the prince, almost l
eaping to his feet in amazement.
   "Why? You very nearly were, anyhow."
   "Yes-I nearly was," whispered the prince, hanging his head.
   "Well then, have you come here for HER? Are you in love with HER?
   With THAT creature?"
   "I did not come to marry at all," replied the prince.
   "Is there anything you hold sacred?"
   "There is."
   "Then swear by it that you did not come here to marry HER!"
   "I'll swear it by whatever you please."
   "I believe you. You may kiss me; I breathe freely at last. But you must know,
 my dear friend, Aglaya does not love you, and she shall never be your wife whil
e I am out of my grave. So be warned in time. Do you hear me?"
   "Yes, I hear."
   The prince flushed up so much that he could not look her in the face.
   "I have waited for you with the greatest impatience (not that you were worth 
it). Every night I have drenched my pillow with tears, not for you, my friend, n
ot for you, don't flatter yourself! I have my own grief, always the same, always
 the same. But I'll tell you why I have been awaiting you so impatiently, becaus
e I believe that Providence itself sent you to be a friend and a brother to me. 
I haven't a friend in the world except Princess Bielokonski, and she is growing 
as stupid as a sheep from old age. Now then, tell me, yes or no? Do you know why
 she called out from her carriage the other night?"
   "I give you my word of honour that I had nothing to do with the matter and kn
ow nothing about it."
   "Very well, I believe you. I have my own ideas about it. Up to yesterday morn
ing I thought it was really Evgenie Pavlovitch who was to blame; now I cannot he
lp agreeing with the others. But why he was made such a fool of I cannot underst
and. However, he is not going to marry Aglaya, I can tell you that. He may be a 
very excellent fellow, but-so it shall be. I was not at all sure of accepting hi
m before, but now I have quite made up my mind that I won't have him. 'Put me in
 my coffin first and then into my grave, and then you may marry my daughter to w
homsoever you please,' so I said to the general this very morning. You see how I
 trust you, my boy."
   "Yes, I see and understand."
   Mrs. Epanchin gazed keenly into the prince's eyes. She was anxious to see wha
t impression the news as to Evgenie Pavlovitch had made upon him.
   "Do you know anything about Gavrila Ardalionovitch?" she asked at last.
   "Oh yes, I know a good deal."
   "Did you know he had communications with Aglaya?"
   "No, I didn't," said the prince, trembling a little, and in great agitation. 
"You say Gavrila Ardalionovitch has private communications with Aglaya?-Impossib
le!"
   "Only quite lately. His sister has been working like a rat to clear the way f
or him all the winter."
   "I don't believe it!" said the prince abruptly, after a short pause. "Had it 
been so I should have known long ago."
   "Oh, of course, yes; he would have come and wept out his secret on your bosom
. Oh, you simpleton-you simpleton! Anyone can deceive you and take you in like a
-like a,-aren't you ashamed to trust him? Can't you see that he humbugs you just
 as much as ever he pleases?"
   "I know very well that he does deceive me occasionally, and he knows that I k
now it, but-" The prince did not finish his sentence.
   "And that's why you trust him, eh? So I should have supposed.
   Good Lord, was there ever such a man as you? Tfu! and are you aware, sir, tha
t this Gania, or his sister Varia, have brought her into correspondence with Nas
tasia Philipovna?"
   "Brought whom?" cried Muishkin.
   "Aglaya."
   "I don't believe it! It's impossible! What object could they have?" He jumped
 up from his chair in his excitement.
   "Nor do I believe it, in spite of the proofs. The girl is selfwilled and fant
astic, and insane! She's wicked, wicked! I'll repeat it for a thousand years tha
t she's wicked; they ALL are, just now, all my daughters, even that 'wet hen' Al
exandra. And yet I don't believe it. Because I don't choose to believe it, perha
ps; but I don't. Why haven't you been?" she turned on the prince suddenly. "Why 
didn't you come near us all these three days, eh?"
   The prince began to give his reasons, but she interrupted him again.
   "Everybody takes you in and deceives you; you went to town yesterday. I dare 
swear you went down on your knees to that rogue, and begged him to accept your t
en thousand roubles!"
   "I never thought of doing any such thing. I have not seen him, and he is not 
a rogue, in my opinion. I have had a letter from him."
   "Show it me!"
   The prince took a paper from his pocket-book, and handed it to Lizabetha Prok
ofievna. It ran as follows:
      "SIR,
   "In the eyes of the world I am sure that I have no cause for pride or self-es
teem. I am much too insignificant for that. But what may be so to other men's ey
es is not so to yours. I am convinced that you are better than other people. Dok
torenko disagrees with me, but I am content to differ from him on this point. I 
will never accept one single copeck from you, but you have helped my mother, and
 I am bound to be grateful to you for that, however weak it may seem. At any rat
e, I have changed my opinion about you, and I think right to inform you of the f
act; but I also suppose that there can be no further inter course between us " A
NTIP BURDOVSKY.
   "P.S.-The two hundred roubles I owe you shall certainly be repaid in time."
   "How extremely stupid!" cried Mrs. Epanchin, giving back the letter abruptly.
 "It was not worth the trouble of reading. Why are you smiling?"
   "Confess that you are pleased to have read it."
   "What! Pleased with all that nonsense! Why, cannot you see that they are all 
infatuated with pride and vanity?"
   "He has acknowledged himself to be in the wrong. Don't you see that the great
er his vanity, the more difficult this admission must have been on his part? Oh,
 what a little child you are, Lizabetha Prokofievna!"
   "Are you tempting me to box your ears for you, or what?"
   "Not at all. I am only proving that you are glad about the letter. Why concea
l your real feelings? You always like to do it."
   "Never come near my house again!" cried Mrs. Epanchin, pale with rage. "Don't
 let me see as much as a SHADOW of you about the place! Do you hear?"
   "Oh yes, and in three days you'll come and invite me yourself.
   Aren't you ashamed now? These are your best feelings; you are only tormenting
 yourself."
   "I'll die before I invite you! I shall forget your very name!
   I've forgotten it already!"
   She marched towards the door.
   "But I'm forbidden your house as it is, without your added threats!" cried th
e prince after her.
   "What? Who forbade you?"
   She turned round so suddenly that one might have supposed a needle had been s
tuck into her.
   The prince hesitated. He perceived that he had said too much now.
   "WHO forbade you?" cried Mrs. Epanchin once more.
   "Aglaya Ivanovna told me-"
   "When? Speak-quick!"
   "She sent to say, yesterday morning, that I was never to dare to come near th
e house again."
   Lizabetha Prokofievna stood like a stone.
   "What did she send? Whom? Was it that boy? Was it a message?quick!"
   "I had a note," said the prince.
   "Where is it? Give it here, at once."
   The prince thought a moment. Then he pulled out of his waistcoat pocket an un
tidy slip of paper, on which was scrawled:
   "PRINCE LEF NICOLAIEVITCH,-If you think fit, after all that has passed, to ho
nour our house with a visit, I can assure you you will not find me among the num
ber of those who are in any way delighted to see you.
         "AGLAYA EPANCHIN."
   Mrs. Epanchin reflected a moment. The next minute she flew at the prince, sei
zed his hand, and dragged him after her to the door.
   "Quick-come along!" she cried, breathless with agitation and impatience. "Com
e along with me this moment!"
   "But you declared I wasn't-"
   "Don't be a simpleton. You behave just as though you weren't a man at all. Co
me on! I shall see, now, with my own eyes. I shall see all."
   "Well, let me get my hat, at least."
   "Here's your miserable hat He couldn't even choose a respectable shape for hi
s hat! Come on! She did that because I took your part and said you ought to have
 come-little vixen!-else she would never have sent you that silly note. It's a m
ost improper note, I call it; most improper for such an intelligent, well-brough
t-up girl to write. H'm! I dare say she was annoyed that you didn't come; but sh
e ought to have known that one can't write like that to an idiot like you, for y
ou'd be sure to take it literally."
   Mrs. Epanchin was dragging the prince along with her all the time, and never 
let go of his hand for an instant. "What are you listening for?" she added, seei
ng that she had committed herself a little. "She wants a clown like you-she hasn
't seen one for some time-to play with. That's why she is anxious for you to com
e to the house. And right glad I am that she'll make a thorough good fool of you
. You deserve it; and she can do it-oh! she can, indeed!-as well as most people.
"
      PART III
      I.
   THE Epanchin family, or at least the more serious members of it, were sometim
es grieved because they seemed so unlike the rest of the world. They were not qu
ite certain, but had at times a strong suspicion that things did not happen to t
hem as they did to other people. Others led a quiet, uneventful life, while they
 were subject to continual upheavals. Others kept on the rails without difficult
y; they ran off at the slightest obstacle. Other houses were governed by a timid
 routine; theirs was somehow different.
   Perhaps Lizabetha Prokofievna was alone in making these fretful observations;
 the girls, though not wanting in intelligence, were still young; the general wa
s intelligent, too, but narrow, and in any difficulty he was content to say, "H'
m!" and leave the matter to his wife. Consequently, on her fell the responsibili
ty. It was not that they distinguished themselves as a family by any particular 
originality, or that their excursions off the track led to any breach of the pro
prieties. Oh no.
   There was nothing premeditated, there was not even any conscious purpose in i
t all, and yet, in spite of everything, the family, although highly respected, w
as not quite what every highly respected family ought to be. For a long time now
 Lizabetha Prokofievna had had it in her mind that all the trouble was owing to 
her "unfortunate character, "and this added to her distress.
   She blamed her own stupid unconventional "eccentricity." Always restless, alw
ays on the go, she constantly seemed to lose her way, and to get into trouble ov
er the simplest and more ordinary affairs of life.
   We said at the beginning of our story, that the Epanchins were liked and este
emed by their neighbours. In spite of his humble origin, Ivan Fedorovitch himsel
f was received everywhere with respect. He deserved this, partly on account of h
is wealth and position, partly because, though limited, he was really a very goo
d fellow. But a certain limitation of mind seems to be an indispensable asset, i
f not to all public personages, at least to all serious financiers. Added to thi
s, his manner was modest and unassuming; he knew when to be silent, yet never al
lowed himself to be trampled upon. Also-and this was more important than all-he 
had the advantage of being under exalted patronage.
   As to Lizabetha Prokofievna, she, as the reader knows, belonged to an aristoc
ratic family. True, Russians think more of influential friends than of birth, bu
t she had both. She was esteemed and even loved by people of consequence in soci
ety, whose example in receiving her was therefore followed by others.
   It seems hardly necessary to remark that her family worries and anxieties had
 little or no foundation, or that her imagination increased them to an absurd de
gree; but if you have a wart on your forehead or nose, you imagine that all the 
world is looking at it, and that people would make fun of you because of it, eve
n if you had discovered America! Doubtless Lizabetha Prokofievna was considered 
"eccentric" in society, but she was none the less esteemed: the pity was that sh
e was ceasing to believe in that esteem. When she thought of her daughters, she 
said to herself sorrowfully that she was a hindrance rather than a help to their
 future, that her character and temper were absurd, ridiculous, insupportable. N
aturally, she put the blame on her surroundings, and from morning to night was q
uarrelling with her husband and children, whom she really loved to the point of 
self-sacrifice, even, one might say, of passion.
   She was, above all distressed by the idea that her daughters might grow up "e
ccentric," like herself; she believed that no other society girls were like them
. "They are growing into Nihilists!" she repeated over and over again. For years
 she had tormented herself with this idea, and with the question: "Why don't the
y get married?"
   "It is to annoy their mother; that is their one aim in life; it can be nothin
g else. The fact is it is all of a piece with these modern ideas, that wretched 
woman's question! Six months ago Aglaya took a fancy to cut off her magnificent 
hair. Why, even I, when I was young, had nothing like it! The scissors were in h
er hand, and I had to go down on my knees and implore her She did it, I know, fro
m sheer mischief, to spite her mother, for she is a naughty, capricious girl, a 
real spoiled child spiteful and mischievous to a degree! And then Alexandra want
ed to shave her head, not from caprice or mischief, but, like a little fool, sim
ply because Aglaya persuaded her she would sleep better without her hair, and no
t suffer from headache! And how many suitors have they not had during the last f
ive years! Excellent offers, too! What more do they want? Why don't they get mar
ried?
   For no other reason than to vex their mother-none-none!"
   But Lizabetha Prokofievna felt somewhat consoled when she could say that one 
of her girls, Adelaida, was settled at last. "It will be one off our hands!" she
 declared aloud, though in private she expressed herself with greater tenderness
. The engagement was both happy and suitable, and was therefore approved in soci
ety.
   Prince S. was a distinguished man, he had money, and his future wife was devo
ted to him; what more could be desired? Lizabetha Prokofievna had felt less anxi
ous about this daughter, however, although she considered her artistic tastes su
spicious. But to make up for them she was, as her mother expressed it, "merry," 
and had plenty of "common-sense." It was Aglaya's future which disturbed her mos
t. With regard to her eldest daughter, Alexandra, the mother never quite knew wh
ether there was cause for anxiety or not. Sometimes she felt as if there was not
hing to be expected from her. She was twenty-five now, and must be fated to be a
n old maid, and "with such beauty, too!" The mother spent whole nights in weepin
g and lamenting, while all the time the cause of her grief slumbered peacefully.
 "What is the matter with her? Is she a Nihilist, or simply a fool?"
   But Lizabetha Prokofievna knew perfectly well how unnecessary was the last qu
estion. She set a high value on Alexandra Ivanovna's judgment, and often consult
ed her in difficulties; but that she was a 'wet hen' she never for a moment doub
ted. "She is so calm; nothing rouses her-though wet hens are not always calm! Oh
! I can't understand it!" Her eldest daughter inspired Lizabetha with a kind of 
puzzled compassion. She did not feel this in Aglaya's case, though the latter wa
s her idol. It may be said that these outbursts and epithets, such as "wet hen "
(in which the maternal solicitude usually showed itself), only made Alexandra la
ugh.
   Sometimes the most trivial thing annoyed Mrs. Epanchin, and drove her into a 
frenzy. For instance, Alexandra Ivanovna liked to sleep late, and was always dre
aming, though her dreams had the peculiarity of being as innocent and naive as t
hose of a child of seven; and the very innocence of her dreams annoyed her mothe
r.
   Once she dreamt of nine hens, and this was the cause of quite a serious quarr
el-no one knew why. Another time she had-it was most unusual-a dream with a spar
k of originality in it. She dreamt of a monk in a dark room, into which she was 
too frightened to go. Adelaida and Aglaya rushed off with shrieks of laughter to
 relate this to their mother, but she was quite angry, and said her daughters we
re all fools.
   "H'm! she is as stupid as a fool! A veritable 'wet hen'! Nothing excites her;
 and yet she is not happy; some days it makes one miserable only to look at her!
 Why is she unhappy, I wonder?" At times Lizabetha Prokofievna put this question
 to her husband, and as usual she spoke in the threatening tone of one who deman
ds an immediate answer. Ivan Fedorovitch would frown, shrug his shoulders, and a
t last give his opinion: "She needs a husband!"
   "God forbid that he should share your ideas, Ivan Fedorovitch!" his wife flas
hed back. "Or that he should be as gross and churlish as you!"
   The general promptly made his escape, and Lizabetha Prokofievna after a while
 grew calm again. That evening, of course, she would be unusually attentive, gen
tle, and respectful to her "gross and churlish" husband, her "dear, kind Ivan Fe
dorovitch," for she had never left off loving him. She was even still "in love" 
with him.
   He knew it well, and for his part held her in the greatest esteem.
   But the mother's great and continual anxiety was Aglaya. "She is exactly like
 me-my image in everything," said Mrs. Epanchin to herself. "A tyrant! A real li
ttle demon! A Nihilist! Eccentric, senseless and mischievous! Good Lord, how unh
appy she will be!"
   But as we said before, the fact of Adelaida's approaching marriage was balm t
o the mother. For a whole month she forgot her fears and worries.
   Adelaida's fate was settled; and with her name that of Aglaya's was linked, i
n society gossip. People whispered that Aglaya, too, was "as good as engaged;" a
nd Aglaya always looked so sweet and behaved so well (during this period), that 
the mother's heart was full of joy. Of course, Evgenie Pavlovitch must be thorou
ghly studied first, before the final step should be taken; but, really, how love
ly dear Aglaya had become-she actually grew more beautiful every day! And then-Y
es, and then-this abominable prince showed his face again, and everything went t
opsy-turvy at once, and everyone seemed as mad as March hares.
   What had really happened?
   If it had been any other family than the Epanchins', nothing particular would
 have happened. But, thanks to Mrs. Epanchin's invariable fussiness and anxiety,
 there could not be the slightest hitch in the simplest matters of everyday life
, but she immediately foresaw the most dreadful and alarming consequences, and s
uffered accordingly.
   What then must have been her condition, when, among all the imaginary anxieti
es and calamities which so constantly beset her, she now saw looming ahead a ser
ious cause for annoyance-something really likely to arouse doubts and suspicions
!
   "How dared they, how DARED they write that hateful anonymous letter informing
 me that Aglaya is in communication with Nastasia Philipovna?" she thought, as s
he dragged the prince along towards her own house, and again when she sat him do
wn at the round table where the family was already assembled. "How dared they so
 much as THINK of such a thing? I should DIE with shame if I thought there was a
 particle of truth in it, or if I were to show the letter to Aglaya herself! Who
 dares play these jokes upon US, the Epanchins? WHY didn't we go to the Yelagin 
instead of coming down here? I TOLD you we had better go to the Yelagin this sum
mer, Ivan Fedorovitch. It's all your fault. I dare say it was that Varia who sen
t the letter. It's all Ivan Fedorovitch. THAT woman is doing it all for him, I k
now she is, to show she can make a fool of him now just as she did when he used 
to give her pearls.
   "But after all is said, we are mixed up in it. Your daughters are mixed up in
 it, Ivan Fedorovitch; young ladies in society, young ladies at an age to be mar
ried; they were present, they heard everything there was to hear. They were mixe
d up with that other scene, too, with those dreadful youths. You must be pleased
 to remember they heard it all. I cannot forgive that wretched prince. I never s
hall forgive him! And why, if you please, has Aglaya had an attack of nerves for
 these last three days? Why has she all but quarrelled with her sisters, even wi
th Alexandra-whom she respects so much that she always kisses her hands as thoug
h she were her mother? What are all these riddles of hers that we have to guess?
 What has Gavrila Ardalionovitch to do with it? Why did she take upon herself to
 champion him this morning, and burst into tears over it? Why is there an allusi
on to that cursed 'poor knight' in the anonymous letter? And why did I rush off 
to him just now like a lunatic, and drag him back here? I do believe I've gone m
ad at last. What on earth have I done now? To talk to a young man about my daugh
ter's secrets-and secrets having to do with himself, too! Thank goodness, he's a
n idiot, and a friend of the house! Surely Aglaya hasn't fallen in love with suc
h a gaby! What an idea! Pfu! we ought all to be put under glass cases-myself fir
st of all-and be shown off as curiosities, at ten copecks a peep!"
   "I shall never forgive you for all this, Ivan Fedorovitch-never!
   Look at her now. Why doesn't she make fun of him? She said she would, and she
 doesn't. Look there! She stares at him with all her eyes, and doesn't move; and
 yet she told him not to come. He looks pale enough; and that abominable chatter
box, Evgenie Pavlovitch, monopolizes the whole of the conversation. Nobody else 
can get a word in. I could soon find out all about everything if I could only ch
ange the subject."
   The prince certainly was very pale. He sat at the table and seemed to be feel
ing, by turns, sensations of alarm and rapture.
   Oh, how frightened he was of looking to one side-one particular corner-whence
 he knew very well that a pair of dark eyes were watching him intently, and how 
happy he was to think that he was once more among them, and occasionally hearing
 that well-known voice, although she had written and forbidden him to come again
!
   "What on earth will she say to me, I wonder?" he thought to himself.
   He had not said a word yet; he sat silent and listened to Evgenie Pavlovitch'
s eloquence. The latter had never appeared so happy and excited as on this eveni
ng. The prince listened to him, but for a long time did not take in a word he sa
id.
   Excepting Ivan Fedorovitch, who had not as yet returned from town, the whole 
family was present. Prince S. was there; and they all intended to go out to hear
 the band very soon.
   Colia arrived presently and joined the circle. "So he is received as usual, a
fter all," thought the prince.
   The Epanchins' country-house was a charming building, built after the model o
f a Swiss chalet, and covered with creepers. It was surrounded on all sides by a
 flower garden, and the family sat, as a rule, on the open verandah as at the pr
ince's house.
   The subject under discussion did not appear to be very popular with the assem
bly, and some would have been delighted to change it; but Evgenie would not stop
 holding forth, and the prince's arrival seemed to spur him on to still further 
oratorical efforts.
   Lizabetha Prokofievna frowned, but had not as yet grasped the subject, which 
seemed to have arisen out of a heated argument.
   Aglaya sat apart, almost in the corner, listening in stubborn silence.
   "Excuse me," continued Evgenie Pavlovitch hotly, "I don't say a word against 
liberalism. Liberalism is not a sin, it is a necessary part of a great whole, wh
ich whole would collapse and fall to pieces without it. Liberalism has just as m
uch right to exist as has the most moral conservatism; but I am attacking RUSSIA
N liberalism; and I attack it for the simple reason that a Russian liberal is no
t a Russian liberal, he is a non-Russian liberal. Show me a real Russian liberal
, and I'll kiss him before you all, with pleasure."
   "If he cared to kiss you, that is," said Alexandra, whose cheeks were red wit
h irritation and excitement.
   "Look at that, now," thought the mother to herself, "she does nothing but sle
ep and eat for a year at a time, and then suddenly flies out in the most incompr
ehensible way!"
   The prince observed that Alexandra appeared to be angry with Evgenie, because
 he spoke on a serious subject in a frivolous manner, pretending to be in earnes
t, but with an under-current of irony.
   "I was saying just now, before you came in, prince, that there has been nothi
ng national up to now, about our liberalism, and nothing the liberals do, or hav
e done, is in the least degree national. They are drawn from two classes only, t
he old landowning class, and clerical families-"
   "How, nothing that they have done is Russian?" asked Prince S.
   "It may be Russian, but it is not national. Our liberals are not Russian, nor
 are our conservatives, and you may be sure that the nation does not recognize a
nything that has been done by the landed gentry, or by the seminarists, or what 
is to be done either."
   "Come, that's good! How can you maintain such a paradox? If you are serious, 
that is. I cannot allow such a statement about the landed proprietors to pass un
challenged. Why, you are a landed proprietor yourself!" cried Prince S. hotly.
   "I suppose you'll say there is nothing national about our literature either?"
 said Alexandra.
   "Well, I am not a great authority on literary questions, but I certainly do h
old that Russian literature is not Russian, except perhaps Lomonosoff, Pouschkin
 and Gogol."
   "In the first place, that is a considerable admission, and in the second plac
e, one of the above was a peasant, and the other two were both landed proprietor
s!"
   "Quite so, but don't be in such a hurry! For since it has been the part of th
ese three men, and only these three, to say something absolutely their own, not 
borrowed, so by this very fact these three men become really national. If any Ru
ssian shall have done or said anything really and absolutely original, he is to 
be called national from that moment, though he may not be able to talk the Russi
an language; still he is a national Russian. I consider that an axiom. But we we
re not speaking of literature; we began by discussing the socialists. Very well 
then, I insist that there does not exist one single Russian socialist. There doe
s not, and there has never existed such a one, because all socialists are derive
d from the two classes-the landed proprietors, and the seminarists. All our emin
ent socialists are merely old liberals of the class of landed proprietors, men w
ho were liberals in the days of serfdom. Why do you laugh? Give me their books, 
give me their studies, their memoirs, and though I am not a literary critic, yet
 I will prove as clear as day that every chapter and every word of their writing
s has been the work of a former landed proprietor of the old school. You'll find
 that all their raptures, all their generous transports are proprietary, all the
ir woes and their tears, proprietary; all proprietary or seminarist! You are lau
ghing again, and you, prince, are smiling too. Don't you agree with me?"
   It was true enough that everybody was laughing, the prince among them.
   "I cannot tell you on the instant whether I agree with you or not," said the 
latter, suddenly stopping his laughter, and starting like a schoolboy caught at 
mischief. "But, I assure you, I am listening to you with extreme gratification."
   So saying, he almost panted with agitation, and a cold sweat stood upon his f
orehead. These were his first words since he had entered the house; he tried to 
lift his eyes, and look around, but dared not; Evgenie Pavlovitch noticed his co
nfusion, and smiled.
   "I'll just tell you one fact, ladies and gentlemen," continued the latter, wi
th apparent seriousness and even exaltation of manner, but with a suggestion of 
"chaff" behind every word, as though he were laughing in his sleeve at his own n
onsense-"a fact, the discovery of which, I believe, I may claim to have made by 
myself alone. At all events, no other has ever said or written a word about it; 
and in this fact is expressed the whole essence of Russian liberalism of the sor
t which I am now considering.
   "In the first place, what is liberalism, speaking generally, but an attack (w
hether mistaken or reasonable, is quite another question) upon the existing orde
r of things? Is this so? Yes.
   Very well. Then my 'fact' consists in this, that RUSSIAN liberalism is not an
 attack upon the existing order of things, but an attack upon the very essence o
f things themselves-indeed, on the things themselves; not an attack on the Russi
an order of things, but on Russia itself. My Russian liberal goes so far as to r
eject Russia; that is, he hates and strikes his own mother.
   Every misfortune and mishap of the mother-country fills him with mirth, and e
ven with ecstasy. He hates the national customs, Russian history, and everything
. If he has a justification, it is that he does not know what he is doing, and b
elieves that his hatred of Russia is the grandest and most profitable kind of li
beralism. (You will often find a liberal who is applauded and esteemed by his fe
llows, but who is in reality the dreariest, blindest, dullest of conservatives, 
and is not aware of the fact.) This hatred for Russia has been mistaken by some 
of our 'Russian liberals' for sincere love of their country, and they boast that
 they see better than their neighbours what real love of one's country should co
nsist in. But of late they have grown, more candid and are ashamed of the expres
sion 'love of country,' and have annihilated the very spirit of the words as som
ething injurious and petty and undignified. This is the truth, and I hold by it;
 but at the same time it is a phenomenon which has not been repeated at any othe
r time or place; and therefore, though I hold to it as a fact, yet I recognize t
hat it is an accidental phenomenon, and may likely enough pass away. There can b
e no such thing anywhere else as a liberal who really hates his country; and how
 is this fact to be explained among US? By my original statement that a Russian 
liberal is NOT a RUSSIAN liberal-that's the only explanation that I can see."
   "I take all that you have said as a joke," said Prince S. seriously.
   "I have not seen all kinds of liberals, and cannot, therefore, set myself up 
as a judge," said Alexandra, "but I have heard all you have said with indignatio
n. You have taken some accidental case and twisted it into a universal law, whic
h is unjust."
   "Accidental case!" said Evgenie Pavlovitch. "Do you consider it an accidental
 case, prince?"
   "I must also admit," said the prince, "that I have not seen much, or been ver
y far into the question; but I cannot help thinking that you are more or less ri
ght, and that Russian liberalism-that phase of it which you are considering, at 
least-really is sometimes inclined to hate Russia itself, and not only its exist
ing order of things in general. Of course this is only PARTIALLY the truth; you 
cannot lay down the law for all"
   The prince blushed and broke off, without finishing what he meant to say.
   In spite of his shyness and agitation, he could not help being greatly intere
sted in the conversation. A special characteristic of his was the naive candour 
with which he always listened to arguments which interested him, and with which 
he answered any questions put to him on the subject at issue. In the very expres
sion of his face this naivete was unmistakably evident, this disbelief in the in
sincerity of others, and unsuspecting disregard of irony or humour in their word
s.
   But though Evgenie Pavlovitch had put his questions to the prince with no oth
er purpose but to enjoy the joke of his simple-minded seriousness, yet now, at h
is answer, he was surprised into some seriousness himself, and looked gravely at
 Muishkin as though he had not expected that sort of answer at all.
   "Why, how strange!" he ejaculated. "You didn't answer me seriously, surely, d
id you?"
   "Did not you ask me the question seriously" inquired the prince, in amazement
.
   Everybody laughed.
   "Oh, trust HIM for that!" said Adelaida. "Evgenie Pavlovitch turns everything
 and everybody he can lay hold of to ridicule.
   You should hear the things he says sometimes, apparently in perfect seriousne
ss."
   "In my opinion the conversation has been a painful one throughout, and we oug
ht never to have begun it," said Alexandra.
   "We were all going for a walk-"
   "Come along then," said Evgenie; "it's a glorious evening. But, to prove that
 this time I was speaking absolutely seriously, and especially to prove this to 
the prince (for you, prince, have interested me exceedingly, and I swear to you 
that I am not quite such an ass as I like to appear sometimes, although I am rat
her an ass, I admit), and-well, ladies and gentlemen, will you allow me to put j
ust one more question to the prince, out of pure curiosity? It shall be the last
. This question came into my mind a couple of hours since (you see, prince, I do
 think seriously at times), and I made my own decision upon it; now I wish to he
ar what the prince will say to it."
   "We have just used the expression 'accidental case.' This is a significant ph
rase; we often hear it. Well, not long since everyone was talking and reading ab
out that terrible murder of six people on the part of a-young fellow, and of the
 extraordinary speech of the counsel for the defence, who observed that in the p
overty-stricken condition of the criminal it must have come NATURALLY into his h
ead to kill these six people. I do not quote his words, but that is the sense of
 them, or something very like it. Now, in my opinion, the barrister who put forw
ard this extraordinary plea was probably absolutely convinced that he was statin
g the most liberal, the most humane, the most enlightened view of the case that 
could possibly be brought forward in these days. Now, was this distortion, this 
capacity for a perverted way of viewing things, a special or accidental case, or
 is such a general rule?"
   Everyone laughed at this.
   "A special case-accidental, of course!" cried Alexandra and Adelaida.
   "Let me remind you once more, Evgenie," said Prince S., "that your joke is ge
tting a little threadbare."
   "What do you think about it, prince?" asked Evgenie, taking no notice of the 
last remark, and observing Muishkin's serious eyes fixed upon his face. "What do
 you think-was it a special or a usual case-the rule, or an exception? I confess
 I put the question especially for you."
   "No, I don't think it was a special case," said the prince, quietly, but firm
ly.
   "My dear fellow!" cried Prince S., with some annoyance, "don't you see that h
e is chaffing you? He is simply laughing at you, and wants to make game of you."
   "I thought Evgenie Pavlovitch was talking seriously," said the prince, blushi
ng and dropping his eyes.
   "My dear prince," continued Prince S. "remember what you and I were saying tw
o or three months ago. We spoke of the fact that in our newly opened Law Courts 
one could already lay one's finger upon so many talented and remarkable young ba
rristers. How pleased you were with the state of things as we found it, and how 
glad I was to observe your delight! We both said it was a matter to be proud of;
 but this clumsy defence that Evgenie mentions, this strange argument CAN, of co
urse, only be an accidental case -one in a thousand!"
   The prince reflected a little, but very soon he replied, with absolute convic
tion in his tone, though he still spoke somewhat shyly and timidly:
   "I only wished to say that this 'distortion,' as Evgenie Pavlovitch expressed
 it, is met with very often, and is far more the general rule than the exception
, unfortunately for Russia. So much so, that if this distortion were not the gen
eral rule, perhaps these dreadful crimes would be less frequent."
   "Dreadful crimes? But I can assure you that crimes just as dreadful, and prob
ably more horrible, have occurred before our times, and at all times, and not on
ly here in Russia, but everywhere else as well. And in my opinion it is not at a
ll likely that such murders will cease to occur for a very long time to come. Th
e only difference is that in former times there was less publicity, while now ev
eryone talks and writes freely about such things-which fact gives the impression
 that such crimes have only now sprung into existence. That is where your mistak
e lies-an extremely natural mistake, I assure you, my dear fellow!" said Prince 
S.
   "I know that there were just as many, and just as terrible, crimes before our
 times. Not long since I visited a convict prison and made acquaintance with som
e of the criminals. There were some even more dreadful criminals than this one w
e have been speaking of-men who have murdered a dozen of their fellowcreatures, 
and feel no remorse whatever. But what I especially noticed was this, that the v
ery most hopeless and remorseless murderer-however hardened a criminal he may be
-still KNOWS THAT HE IS A CRIMINAL; that is, he is conscious that he has acted w
ickedly, though he may feel no remorse whatever. And they were all like this. Th
ose of whom Evgenie Pavlovitch has spoken, do not admit that they are criminals 
at all; they think they had a right to do what they did, and that they were even
 doing a good deed, perhaps. I consider there is the greatest difference between
 the two cases. And recollect-it was a YOUTH, at the particular age which is mos
t helplessly susceptible to the distortion of ideas!"
   Prince S. was now no longer smiling; he gazed at the prince in bewilderment.
   Alexandra, who had seemed to wish to put in her word when the prince began, n
ow sat silent, as though some sudden thought had caused her to change her mind a
bout speaking.
   Evgenie Pavlovitch gazed at him in real surprise, and this time his expressio
n of face had no mockery in it whatever.
   "What are you looking so surprised about, my friend?" asked Mrs.
   Epanchin, suddenly. "Did you suppose he was stupider than yourself, and was i
ncapable of forming his own opinions, or what?"
   "No! Oh no! Not at all!" said Evgenie. "But-how is it, prince, that you-(excu
se the question, will you?)-if you are capable of observing and seeing things as
 you evidently do, how is it that you saw nothing distorted or perverted in that
 claim upon your property, which you acknowledged a day or two since; and which 
was full of arguments founded upon the most distorted views of right and wrong?"
   "I'll tell you what, my friend," cried Mrs. Epanchin, of a sudden, "here are 
we all sitting here and imagining we are very clever, and perhaps laughing at th
e prince, some of us, and meanwhile he has received a letter this very day in wh
ich that same claimant renounces his claim, and begs the prince's pardon.
   There I we don't often get that sort of letter; and yet we are not ashamed to
 walk with our noses in the air before him."
   "And Hippolyte has come down here to stay," said Colia, suddenly.
   "What! has he arrived?" said the prince, starting up.
   "Yes, I brought him down from town just after you had left the house."
   "There now! It's just like him," cried Lizabetha Prokofievna, boiling over on
ce more, and entirely oblivious of the fact that she had just taken the prince's
 part. "I dare swear that you went up to town yesterday on purpose to get the li
ttle wretch to do you the great honour of coming to stay at your house. You did 
go up to town, you know you did-you said so yourself! Now then, did you, or did 
you not, go down on your knees and beg him to come, confess!"
   "No, he didn't, for I saw it all myself," said Colia. "On the contrary, Hippo
lyte kissed his hand twice and thanked him; and all the prince said was that he 
thought Hippolyte might feel better here in the country!"
   "Don't, Colia,-what is the use of saying all that?" cried the prince, rising 
and taking his hat.
   "Where are you going to now?" cried Mrs. Epanchin.
   "Never mind about him now, prince," said Colia. "He is all right and taking a
 nap after the journey. He is very happy to be here; but I think perhaps it woul
d be better if you let him alone for today,-he is very sensitive now that he is 
so ill-and he might be embarrassed if you show him too much attention at first. 
He is decidedly better today, and says he has not felt so well for the last six 
months, and has coughed much less, too."
   The prince observed that Aglaya came out of her corner and approached the tab
le at this point.
   He did not dare look at her, but he was conscious, to the very tips of his fi
ngers, that she was gazing at him, perhaps angrily; and that she had probably fl
ushed up with a look of fiery indignation in her black eyes.
   "It seems to me, Mr. Colia, that you were very foolish to bring your young fr
iend down-if he is the same consumptive boy who wept so profusely, and invited u
s all to his own funeral," remarked Evgenie Pavlovitch. "He talked so eloquently
 about the blank wall outside his bedroom window, that I'm sure he will never su
pport life here without it. "
   "I think so too," said Mrs. Epanchin; "he will quarrel with you, and be off,"
 and she drew her workbox towards her with an air of dignity, quite oblivious of
 the fact that the family was about to start for a walk in the park.
   "Yes, I remember he boasted about the blank wall in an extraordinary way," co
ntinued Evgenie, "and I feel that without that blank wall he will never be able 
to die eloquently; and he does so long to die eloquently!"
   "Oh, you must forgive him the blank wall," said the prince, quietly. "He has 
come down to see a few trees now, poor fellow."
   "Oh, I forgive him with all my heart; you may tell him so if you like," laugh
ed Evgenie.
   "I don't think you should take it quite like that," said the prince, quietly,
 and without removing his eyes from the carpet.
   "I think it is more a case of his forgiving you "
   "Forgiving me! why so? What have I done to need his forgiveness?"
   "If you don't understand, then-but of course, you do understand.
   He wished-he wished to bless you all round and to have your blessing-before h
e died-that's all."
   "My dear prince," began Prince S., hurriedly, exchanging glances with some of
 those present, "you will not easily find heaven on earth, and yet you seem to e
xpect to. Heaven is a difficult thing to find anywhere, prince; far more difficu
lt than appears to that good heart of yours. Better stop this conversation, or w
e shall all be growing quite disturbed in our minds, and-"
   "Let's go and hear the band, then," said Lizabetha Prokofievna, angrily risin
g from her place.
   The rest of the company followed her example.
      II.
   THE prince suddenly approached Evgenie Pavlovitch.
   "Evgenie Pavlovitch," he said, with strange excitement and seizing the latter
's hand in his own, "be assured that I esteem you as a generous and honourable m
an, in spite of everything. Be assured of that."
   Evgenie Pavlovitch fell back a step in astonishment. For one moment it was al
l he could do to restrain himself from bursting out laughing; but, looking close
r, he observed that the prince did not seem to be quite himself; at all events, 
he was in a very curious state.
   "I wouldn't mind betting, prince," he cried, "that you did not in the least m
ean to say that, and very likely you meant to address someone else altogether. W
hat is it? Are you feeling unwell or anything?"
   "Very likely, extremely likely, and you must be a very close observer to dete
ct the fact that perhaps I did not intend to come up to YOU at all."
   So saying he smiled strangely; but suddenly and excitedly he began again:
   "Don't remind me of what I have done or said. Don't! I am very much ashamed o
f myself, I-"
   "Why, what have you done? I don't understand you."
   "I see you are ashamed of me, Evgenie Pavlovitch; you are blushing for me; th
at's a sign of a good heart. Don't be afraid;
   I shall go away directly."
   "What's the matter with him? Do his fits begin like that?" said Lizabetha Pro
kofievna, in a high state of alarm, addressing Colia.
   "No, no, Lizabetha Prokofievna, take no notice of me. I am not going to have 
a fit. I will go away directly; but I know I am afflicted. I was twenty-four yea
rs an invalid, you see-the first twenty-four years of my life-so take all I do a
nd say as the sayings and actions of an invalid. I'm going away directly, I real
ly am-don't be afraid. I am not blushing, for I don't think I need blush about i
t, need I? But I see that I am out of place in society-society is better without
 me. It's not vanity, I assure you. I have thought over it all these last three 
days, and I have made up my mind that I ought to unbosom myself candidly before 
you at the first opportunity. There are certain things, certain great ideas, whi
ch I must not so much as approach, as Prince S. has just reminded me, or I shall
 make you all laugh. I have no sense of proportion, I know; my words and gesture
s do not express my ideas-they are a humiliation and abasement of the ideas, and
 therefore, I have no right-and I am too sensitive. Still, I believe I am belove
d in this household, and esteemed far more than I deserve. But I can't help know
ing that after twenty-four years of illness there must be some trace left, so th
at it is impossible for people to refrain from laughing at me sometimes; don't y
ou think so?"
   He seemed to pause for a reply, for some verdict, as it were, and looked humb
ly around him.
   All present stood rooted to the earth with amazement at this unexpected and a
pparently uncalled-for outbreak; but the poor prince's painful and rambling spee
ch gave rise to a strange episode.
   "Why do you say all this here?" cried Aglaya, suddenly. "Why do you talk like
 this to THEM?"
   She appeared to be in the last stages of wrath and irritation; her eyes flash
ed. The prince stood dumbly and blindly before her, and suddenly grew pale.
   "There is not one of them all who is worthy of these words of yours," continu
ed Aglaya. "Not one of them is worth your little finger, not one of them has hea
rt or head to compare with yours!
   You are more honest than all, and better, nobler, kinder, wiser than all. The
re are some here who are unworthy to bend and pick up the handkerchief you have 
just dropped. Why do you humiliate yourself like this, and place yourself lower 
than these people?
   Why do you debase yourself before them? Why have you no pride?"
   "My God! Who would ever have believed this?" cried Mrs. Epanchin, wringing he
r hands.
   "Hurrah for the 'poor knight'!" cried Colia.
   "Be quiet! How dare they laugh at me in your house?" said Aglaya, turning sha
rply on her mother in that hysterical frame of mind that rides recklessly over e
very obstacle and plunges blindly through proprieties. "Why does everyone, every
one worry and torment me? Why have they all been bullying me these three days ab
out you, prince? I will not marry you-never, and under no circumstances! Know th
at once and for all; as if anyone could marry an absurd creature like you! Just 
look in the glass and see what you look like, this very moment! Why, WHY do they
 torment me and say I am going to marry you? You must know it; you are in the pl
ot with them!"
   "No one ever tormented you on the subject," murmured Adelaida, aghast.
   "No one ever thought of such a thing! There has never been a word said about 
it!" cried Alexandra.
   "Who has been annoying her? Who has been tormenting the child? Who could have
 said such a thing to her? Is she raving?" cried Lizabetha Prokofievna, tremblin
g with rage, to the company in general.
   "Every one of them has been saying it-every one of them-all these three days!
 And I will never, never marry him!"
   So saying, Aglaya burst into bitter tears, and, hiding her face in her handke
rchief, sank back into a chair.
   "But he has never even-"
   "I have never asked you to marry me, Aglaya Ivanovna!" said the prince, of a 
sudden.
   "WHAT?" cried Mrs. Epanchin, raising her hands in horror. "WHAT'S that?"
   She could not believe her ears.
   "I meant to say-I only meant to say," said the prince, faltering, "I merely m
eant to explain to Aglaya Ivanovna-to have the honour to explain, as it were-tha
t I had no intention-never had-to ask the honour of her hand. I assure you I am 
not guilty, Aglaya Ivanovna, I am not, indeed. I never did wish to-I never thoug
ht of it at all-and never shall-you'll see it yourself-you may be quite assured 
of it. Some wicked person has been maligning me to you; but it's all right. Don'
t worry about it."
   So saying, the prince approached Aglaya.
   She took the handkerchief from her face, glanced keenly at him, took in what 
he had said, and burst out laughing-such a merry, unrestrained laugh, so hearty 
and gay, that. Adelaida could not contain herself. She, too, glanced at the prin
ce's panic-stricken countenance, then rushed at her sister, threw her arms round
 her neck, and burst into as merry a fit of laughter as Aglaya's own.
   They laughed together like a couple of school-girls. Hearing and seeing this,
 the prince smiled happily, and in accents of relief and joy, he exclaimed "Well
, thank God-thank God!"
   Alexandra now joined in, and it looked as though the three sisters were going
 to laugh on for ever.
   "They are insane," muttered Lizabetha Prokofievna. "Either they frighten one 
out of one's wits, or else-"
   But Prince S. was laughing now, too, so was Evgenie Pavlovitch, so was Colia,
 and so was the prince himself, who caught the infection as he looked round radi
antly upon the others.
   "Come along, let's go out for a walk!" cried Adelaida. "We'll all go together
, and the prince must absolutely go with us. You needn't go away, you dear good 
fellow! ISN'T he a dear, Aglaya?
   Isn't he, mother? I must really give him a kiss for-for his explanation to Ag
laya just now. Mother, dear, I may kiss him, mayn't I? Aglaya, may I kiss YOUR p
rince?" cried the young rogue, and sure enough she skipped up to the prince and 
kissed his forehead.
   He seized her hands, and pressed them so hard that Adelaida nearly cried out;
 he then gazed with delight into her eyes, and raising her right hand to his lip
s with enthusiasm, kissed it three times.
   "Come along," said Aglaya. "Prince, you must walk with me. May he, mother? Th
is young cavalier, who won't have me? You said you would NEVER have me, didn't y
ou, prince? No-no, not like that;
   THAT'S not the way to give your arm. Don't you know how to give your arm to a
 lady yet? There-so. Now, come along, you and I will lead the way. Would you lik
e to lead the way with me alone, tete-a-tete?"
   She went on talking and chatting without a pause, with occasional little burs
ts of laughter between.
   "Thank God-thank God!" said Lizabetha Prokofievna to herself, without quite k
nowing why she felt so relieved.
   "What extraordinary people they are!" thought Prince S., for perhaps the hund
redth time since he had entered into intimate relations with the family; but-he 
liked these "extraordinary people," all the same. As for Prince Lef Nicolaievitc
h himself, Prince S. did not seem quite to like him, somehow. He was decidedly p
reoccupied and a little disturbed as they all started off.
   Evgenie Pavlovitch seemed to be in a lively humour. He made Adelaida and Alex
andra laugh all the way to the Vauxhall; but they both laughed so very really an
d promptly that the worthy Evgenie began at last to suspect that they were not l
istening to him at all.
   At this idea, he burst out laughing all at once, in quite unaffected mirth, a
nd without giving any explanation.
   The sisters, who also appeared to be in high spirits, never tired of glancing
 at Aglaya and the prince, who were walking in front.
   It was evident that their younger sister was a thorough puzzle to them both.
   Prince S. tried hard to get up a conversation with Mrs. Epanchin upon outside
 subjects, probably with the good intention of distracting and amusing her; but 
he bored her dreadfully. She was absent-minded to a degree, and answered at cros
s purposes, and sometimes not at all.
   But the puzzle and mystery of Aglaya was not yet over for the evening. The la
st exhibition fell to the lot of the prince alone.
   When they had proceeded some hundred paces or so from the house, Aglaya said 
to her obstinately silent cavalier in a quick halfwhisper:
   "Look to the right!"
   The prince glanced in the direction indicated.
   "Look closer. Do you see that bench, in the park there, just by those three b
ig trees-that green bench?"
   The prince replied that he saw it.
   "Do you like the position of it? Sometimes of a morning early, at seven o'clo
ck, when all the rest are still asleep, I come out and sit there alone."
   The prince muttered that the spot was a lovely one.
   "Now, go away, I don't wish to have your arm any longer; or perhaps, better, 
continue to give me your arm, and walk along beside me, but don't speak a word t
o me. I wish to think by myself."
   The warning was certainly unnecessary; for the prince would not have said a w
ord all the rest of the time whether forbidden to speak or not. His heart beat l
oud and painfully when Aglaya spoke of the bench; could she-but no! he banished 
the thought, after an instant's deliberation.
   At Pavlofsk, on weekdays, the public is more select than it is on Sundays and
 Saturdays, when the townsfolk come down to walk about and enjoy the park.
   The ladies dress elegantly, on these days, and it is the fashion to gather ro
und the band, which is probably the best of our pleasure-garden bands, and plays
 the newest pieces. The behaviour of the public is most correct and proper, and 
there is an appearance of friendly intimacy among the usual frequenters. Many co
me for nothing but to look at their acquaintances, but there are others who come
 for the sake of the music. It is very seldom that anything happens to break the
 harmony of the proceedings, though, of course, accidents will happen everywhere
.
   On this particular evening the weather was lovely, and there were a large num
ber of people present. All the places anywhere near the orchestra were occupied.
   Our friends took chairs near the side exit. The crowd and the music cheered M
rs. Epanchin a little, and amused the girls; they bowed and shook hands with som
e of their friends and nodded at a distance to others; they examined the ladies'
 dresses, noticed comicalities and eccentricities among the people, and laughed 
and talked among themselves. Evgenie Pavlovitch, too, found plenty of friends to
 bow to. Several people noticed Aglaya and the prince, who were still together.
   Before very long two or three young men had come up, and one or two remained 
to talk; all of these young men appeared to be on intimate terms with Evgenie Pa
vlovitch. Among them was a young officer, a remarkably handsome fellow-very good
-natured and a great chatterbox. He tried to get up a conversation with Aglaya, 
and did his best to secure her attention. Aglaya behaved very graciously to him,
 and chatted and laughed merrily. Evgenie Pavlovitch begged the prince's leave t
o introduce their friend to him. The prince hardly realized what was wanted of h
im, but the introduction came off; the two men bowed and shook hands.
   Evgenie Pavlovitch's friend asked the prince some question, but the latter di
d not reply, or if he did, he muttered something so strangely indistinct that th
ere was nothing to be made of it. The officer stared intently at him, then glanc
ed at Evgenie, divined why the latter had introduced him, and gave his undivided
 attention to Aglaya again. Only Evgenie Pavlovitch observed that Aglaya flushed
 up for a moment at this.
   The prince did not notice that others were talking and making themselves agre
eable to Aglaya; in fact, at moments, he almost forgot that he was sitting by he
r himself. At other moments he felt a longing to go away somewhere and be alone 
with his thoughts, and to feel that no one knew where he was.
   Or if that were impossible he would like to be alone at home, on the terrace-
without either Lebedeff or his children, or anyone else about him, and to lie th
ere and think-a day and night and another day again! He thought of the mountains
-and especially of a certain spot which he used to frequent, whence he would loo
k down upon the distant valleys and fields, and see the waterfall, far off, like
 a little silver thread, and the old ruined castle in the distance. Oh! how he l
onged to be there now-alone with his thoughts-to think of one thing all his life
-one thing! A thousand years would not be too much time! And let everyone here f
orget him-forget him utterly! How much better it would have been if they had nev
er known him-if all this could but prove to be a dream. Perhaps it was a dream!
   Now and then he looked at Aglaya for five minutes at a time, without taking h
is eyes off her face; but his expression was very strange; he would gaze at her 
as though she were an object a couple of miles distant, or as though he were loo
king at her portrait and not at herself at all.
   "Why do you look at me like that, prince?" she asked suddenly, breaking off h
er merry conversation and laughter with those about her. "I'm afraid of you! You
 look as though you were just going to put out your hand and touch my face to se
e if it's real!
   Doesn't he, Evgenie Pavlovitch-doesn't he look like that?"
   The prince seemed surprised that he should have been addressed at all; he ref
lected a moment, but did not seem to take in what had been said to him; at all e
vents, he did not answer. But observing that she and the others had begun to lau
gh, he too opened his mouth and laughed with them.
   The laughter became general, and the young officer, who seemed a particularly
 lively sort of person, simply shook with mirth.
   Aglaya suddenly whispered angrily to herself the word-"Idiot!"
   "My goodness-surely she is not in love with such a-surely she isn't mad!" gro
aned Mrs. Epanchin, under her breath.
   "It's all a joke, mamma; it's just a joke like the 'poor knight' -nothing mor
e whatever, I assure you!" Alexandra whispered in her ear. "She is chaffing him-
making a fool of him, after her own private fashion, that's all! But she carries
 it just a little too far-she is a regular little actress. How she frightened us
 just now-didn't she?-and all for a lark!"
   "Well, it's lucky she has happened upon an idiot, then, that's all I can say!
" whispered Lizabetha Prokofievna, who was somewhat comforted, however, by her d
aughter's remark.
   The prince had heard himself referred to as "idiot," and had shuddered at the
 moment; but his shudder, it so happened, was not caused by the word applied to 
him. The fact was that in the crowd, not far from where lie was sitting, a pale 
familiar face, with curly black hair, and a well-known smile and expression, had
 flashed across his vision for a moment, and disappeared again.
   Very likely he had imagined it! There only remained to him the impression of 
a strange smile, two eyes, and a bright green tie.
   Whether the man had disappeared among the crowd, or whether he had turned tow
ards the Vauxhall, the prince could not say.
   But a moment or two afterwards he began to glance keenly about him. That firs
t vision might only too likely be the forerunner of a second; it was almost cert
ain to be so. Surely he had not forgotten the possibility of such a meeting when
 he came to the Vauxhall? True enough, he had not remarked where he was coming t
o when he set out with Aglaya; he had not been in a condition to remark anything
 at all.
   Had he been more careful to observe his companion, he would have seen that fo
r the last quarter of an hour Aglaya had also been glancing around in apparent a
nxiety, as though she expected to see someone, or something particular, among th
e crowd of people.
   Now, at the moment when his own anxiety became so marked, her excitement also
 increased visibly, and when he looked about him, she did the same.
   The reason for their anxiety soon became apparent. From that very side entran
ce to the Vauxhall, near which the prince and all the Epanchin party were seated
, there suddenly appeared quite a large knot of persons, at least a dozen.
   Heading this little band walked three ladies, two of whom were remarkably lov
ely; and there was nothing surprising in the fact that they should have had a la
rge troop of admirers following in their wake.
   But there was something in the appearance of both the ladies and their admire
rs which was peculiar, quite different for that of the rest of the public assemb
led around the orchestra.
   Nearly everyone observed the little band advancing, and all pretended not to 
see or notice them, except a few young fellows who exchanged glances and smiled,
 saying something to one another in whispers.
   It was impossible to avoid noticing them, however, in reality, for they made 
their presence only too conspicuous by laughing and talking loudly. It was to be
 supposed that some of them were more than half drunk, although they were well e
nough dressed, some even particularly well. There were one or two, however, who 
were very strange-looking creatures, with flushed faces and extraordinary clothe
s; some were military men; not all were quite young; one or two were middle-aged
 gentlemen of decidedly disagreeable appearance, men who are avoided in society 
like the plague, decked out in large gold studs and rings, and magnificently "go
t up," generally.
   Among our suburban resorts there are some which enjoy a specially high reputa
tion for respectability and fashion; but the most careful individual is not abso
lutely exempt from the danger of a tile falling suddenly upon his head from his 
neighbour's roof.
   Such a tile was about to descend upon the elegant and decorous public now ass
embled to hear the music.
   In order to pass from the Vauxhall to the band-stand, the visitor has to desc
end two or three steps. Just at these steps the group paused, as though it feare
d to proceed further; but very quickly one of the three ladies, who formed its a
pex, stepped forward into the charmed circle, followed by two members of her sui
te.
   One of these was a middle-aged man of very respectable appearance, but with t
he stamp of parvenu upon him, a man whom nobody knew, and who evidently knew nob
ody. The other follower was younger and far less respectable-looking.
   No one else followed the eccentric lady; but as she descended the steps she d
id not even look behind her, as though it were absolutely the same to her whethe
r anyone were following or not.
   She laughed and talked loudly, however, just as before. She was dressed with 
great taste, but with rather more magnificence than was needed for the occasion,
 perhaps.
   She walked past the orchestra, to where an open carriage was waiting, near th
e road.
   The prince had not seen HER for more than three months. All these days since 
his arrival from Petersburg he had intended to pay her a visit, but some mysteri
ous presentiment had restrained him. He could not picture to himself what impres
sion this meeting with her would make upon him, though he had often tried to ima
gine it, with fear and trembling. One fact was quite certain, and that was that 
the meeting would be painful.
   Several times during the last six months he had recalled the effect which the
 first sight of this face had had upon him, when he only saw its portrait. He re
collected well that even the portrait face had left but too painful an impressio
n.
   That month in the provinces, when he had seen this woman nearly every day, ha
d affected him so deeply that he could not now look back upon it calmly. In the 
very look of this woman there was something which tortured him. In conversation 
with Rogojin he had attributed this sensation to pity-immeasurable pity, and thi
s was the truth. The sight of the portrait face alone had filled his heart full 
of the agony of real sympathy; and this feeling of sympathy, nay, of actual SUFF
ERING, for her, had never left his heart since that hour, and was still in full 
force. Oh yes, and more powerful than ever!
   But the prince was not satisfied with what he had said to Rogojin. Only at th
is moment, when she suddenly made her appearance before him, did he realize to t
he full the exact emotion which she called up in him, and which he had not descr
ibed correctly to Rogojin.
   And, indeed, there were no words in which he could have expressed his horror,
 yes, HORROR, for he was now fully convinced from his own private knowledge of h
er, that the woman was mad.
   If, loving a woman above everything in the world, or at least having a foreta
ste of the possibility of such love for her, one were suddenly to behold her on 
a chain, behind bars and under the lash of a keeper, one would feel something li
ke what the poor prince now felt.
   "What's the matter?" asked Aglaya, in a whisper, giving his sleeve a little t
ug.
   He turned his head towards her and glanced at her black and (for some reason)
 flashing eyes, tried to smile, and then, apparently forgetting her in an instan
t, turned to the right once more, and continued to watch the startling apparitio
n before him.
   Nastasia Philipovna was at this moment passing the young ladies' chairs.
   Evgenie Pavlovitch continued some apparently extremely funny and interesting 
anecdote to Alexandra, speaking quickly and with much animation. The prince reme
mbered that at this moment Aglaya remarked in a half-whisper:
   "WHAT a-"
   She did not finish her indefinite sentence; she restrained herself in a momen
t; but it was enough.
   Nastasia Philipovna, who up to now had been walking along as though she had n
ot noticed the Epanchin party, suddenly turned her head in their direction, as t
hough she had just observed Evgenie Pavlovitch sitting there for the first time.
   "Why, I declare, here he is!" she cried, stopping suddenly. "The man one can'
t find with all one's messengers sent about the place, sitting just under one's 
nose, exactly where one never thought of looking! I thought you were sure to be 
at your uncle's by this time."
   Evgenie Pavlovitch flushed up and looked angrily at Nastasia Philipovna, then
 turned his back on her.
   "What I don't you know about it yet? He doesn't know-imagine that! Why, he's 
shot himself. Your uncle shot himself this very morning. I was told at two this 
afternoon. Half the town must know it by now. They say there are three hundred a
nd fifty thousand roubles, government money, missing; some say five hundred thou
sand. And I was under the impression that he would leave you a fortune! He's whi
stled it all away. A most depraved old gentleman, really! Well, ta, ta!-bonne ch
ance! Surely you intend to be off there, don't you? Ha, ha! You've retired from 
the army in good time, I see! Plain clothes! Well done, sly rogue! Nonsense! I s
ee-you knew it all before-I dare say you knew all about it yesterday-"
   Although the impudence of this attack, this public proclamation of intimacy, 
as it were, was doubtless premeditated, and had its special object, yet Evgenie 
Pavlovitch at first seemed to intend to make no show of observing either his tor
mentor or her words.
   But Nastasia's communication struck him with the force of a thunderclap. On h
earing of his uncle's death he suddenly grew as white as a sheet, and turned tow
ards his informant.
   At this moment, Lizabetha Prokofievna rose swiftly from her seat, beckoned he
r companions, and left the place almost at a run.
   Only the prince stopped behind for a moment, as though in indecision; and Evg
enie Pavlovitch lingered too, for he had not collected his scattered wits. But t
he Epanchins had not had time to get more than twenty paces away when a scandalo
us episode occurred. The young officer, Evgenie Pavlovitch's friend who had been
 conversing with Aglaya, said aloud in a great state of indignation:
   "She ought to be whipped-that's the only way to deal with creatures like that
-she ought to be whipped!"
   This gentleman was a confidant of Evgenie's, and had doubtless heard of the c
arriage episode.
   Nastasia turned to him. Her eyes flashed; she rushed up to a young man standi
ng near, whom she did not know in the least, but who happened to have in his han
d a thin cane. Seizing this from him, she brought it with all her force across t
he face of her insulter.
   All this occurred, of course, in one instant of time.
   The young officer, forgetting himself, sprang towards her.
   Nastasia's followers were not by her at the moment (the elderly gentleman hav
ing disappeared altogether, and the younger man simply standing aside and roarin
g with laughter).
   In another moment, of course, the police would have been on the spot, and it 
would have gone hard with Nastasia Philipovna had not unexpected aid appeared.
   Muishkin, who was but a couple of steps away, had time to spring forward and 
seize the officer's arms from behind.
   The officer, tearing himself from the prince's grasp, pushed him so violently
 backwards that he staggered a few steps and then subsided into a chair.
   But there were other defenders for Nastasia on the spot by this time. The gen
tleman known as the "boxer" now confronted the enraged officer.
   "Keller is my name, sir; ex-lieutenant," he said, very loud. "If you will acc
ept me as champion of the fair sex, I am at your disposal. English boxing has no
 secrets from me. I sympathize with you for the insult you have received, but I 
can't permit you to raise your hand against a woman in public. If you prefer to 
meet me-as would be more fitting to your rank-in some other manner, of course yo
u understand me, captain."
   But the young officer had recovered himself, and was no longer listening. At 
this moment Rogojin appeared, elbowing through the crowd; he took Nastasia's han
d, drew it through his arm, and quickly led her away. He appeared to be terribly
 excited; he was trembling all over, and was as pale as a corpse.
   As he carried Nastasia off, he turned and grinned horribly in the officer's f
ace, and with low malice observed:
   "Tfu! look what the fellow got! Look at the blood on his cheek!
   Ha, ha!"
   Recollecting himself, however, and seeing at a glance the sort of people he h
ad to deal with, the officer turned his back on both his opponents, and courteou
sly, but concealing his face with his handkerchief, approached the prince, who w
as now rising from the chair into which he had fallen.
   "Prince Muishkin, I believe? The gentleman to whom I had the honour of being 
introduced?"
   "She is mad, insane-I assure you, she is mad," replied the prince in tremblin
g tones, holding out both his hands mechanically towards the officer.
   "I cannot boast of any such knowledge, of course, but I wished to know your n
ame."
   He bowed and retired without waiting for an answer.
   Five seconds after the disappearance of the last actor in this scene, the pol
ice arrived. The whole episode had not lasted more than a couple of minutes. Som
e of the spectators had risen from their places, and departed altogether; some m
erely exchanged their seats for others a little further off; some were delighted
 with the occurrence, and talked and laughed over it for a long time.
   In a word, the incident closed as such incidents do, and the band began to pl
ay again. The prince walked away after the Epanchin party. Had he thought of loo
king round to the left after he had been pushed so unceremoniously into the chai
r, he would have observed Aglaya standing some twenty yards away. She had stayed
 to watch the scandalous scene in spite of her mother's and sisters' anxious cri
es to her to come away.
   Prince S. ran up to her and persuaded her, at last, to come home with them.
   Lizabetha Prokofievna saw that she returned in such a state of agitation that
 it was doubtful whether she had even heard their calls. But only a couple of mi
nutes later, when they had reached the park, Aglaya suddenly remarked, in her us
ual calm, indifferent voice:
   "I wanted to see how the farce would end."
      III.
   THE occurrence at the Vauxhall had filled both mother and daughters with some
thing like horror. In their excitement Lizabetha Prokofievna and the girls were 
nearly running all the way home.
   In her opinion there was so much disclosed and laid bare by the episode, that
, in spite of the chaotic condition of her mind, she was able to feel more or le
ss decided on certain points which, up to now, had been in a cloudy condition.
   However, one and all of the party realized that something important had happe
ned, and that, perhaps fortunately enough, something which had hitherto been env
eloped in the obscurity of guess-work had now begun to come forth a little from 
the mists.
   In spite of Prince S.'s assurances and explanations, Evgenie Pavlovitch's rea
l character and position were at last coming to light. He was publicly convicted
 of intimacy with "that creature." So thought Lizabetha Prokofievna and her two 
elder daughters.
   But the real upshot of the business was that the number of riddles to be solv
ed was augmented. The two girls, though rather irritated at their mother's exagg
erated alarm and haste to depart from the scene, had been unwilling to worry her
 at first with questions.
   Besides, they could not help thinking that their sister Aglaya probably knew 
more about the whole matter than both they and their mother put together.
   Prince S. looked as black as night, and was silent and moody.
   Mrs. Epanchin did not say a word to him all the way home, and he did not seem
 to observe the fact. Adelaida tried to pump him a little by asking, "who was th
e uncle they were talking about, and what was it that had happened in Petersburg
?" But he had merely muttered something disconnected about "making inquiries," a
nd that "of course it was all nonsense." "Oh, of course," replied Adelaida, and 
asked no more questions. Aglaya, too, was very quiet; and the only remark she ma
de on the way home was that they were "walking much too fast to be pleasant."
   Once she turned and observed the prince hurrying after them.
   Noticing his anxiety to catch them up, she smiled ironically, and then looked
 back no more. At length, just as they neared the house, General Epanchin came o
ut and met them; he had only just arrived from town.
   His first word was to inquire after Evgenie Pavlovitch. But Lizabetha stalked
 past him, and neither looked at him nor answered his question.
   He immediately judged from the faces of his daughters and Prince S. that ther
e was a thunderstorm brewing, and he himself already bore evidences of unusual p
erturbation of mind.
   He immediately button-holed Prince S., and standing at the front door, engage
d in a whispered conversation with him. By the troubled aspect of both of them, 
when they entered the house, and approached Mrs. Epanchin, it was evident that t
hey had been discussing very disturbing news.
   Little by little the family gathered together upstairs in Lizabetha Prokofiev
na's apartments, and Prince Muishkin found himself alone on the verandah when he
 arrived. He settled himself in a corner and sat waiting, though he knew not wha
t he expected.
   It never struck him that he had better go away, with all this disturbance in 
the house. He seemed to have forgotten all the world, and to be ready to sit on 
where he was for years on end.
   From upstairs he caught sounds of excited conversation every now and then.
   He could not say how long he sat there. It grew late and became quite dark.
   Suddenly Aglaya entered the verandah. She seemed to be quite calm, though a l
ittle pale.
   Observing the prince, whom she evidently did not expect to see there, alone i
n the corner, she smiled, and approached him:
   "What are you doing there?" she asked.
   The prince muttered something, blushed, and jumped up; but Aglaya immediately
 sat down beside him; so he reseated himself.
   She looked suddenly, but attentively into his face, then at the window, as th
ough thinking of something else, and then again at him.
   "Perhaps she wants to laugh at me," thought the prince, "but no; for if she d
id she certainly would do so."
   "Would you like some tea? I'll order some," she said, after a minute or two o
f silence.
   "N-no thanks, I don't know-"
   "Don't know! How can you not know? By-the-by, look here-if someone were to ch
allenge you to a duel, what should you do? I wished to ask you this-some time ag
o-"
   "Why? Nobody would ever challenge me to a duel!"
   "But if they were to, would you be dreadfully frightened?"
   "I dare say I should be-much alarmed!"
   "Seriously? Then are you a coward?"
   "N-no!-I don't think so. A coward is a man who is afraid and runs away; the m
an who is frightened but does not run away, is not quite a coward," said the pri
nce with a smile, after a moment's thought.
   "And you wouldn't run away?"
   "No-I don't think I should run away," replied the prince, laughing outright a
t last at Aglaya's questions.
   "Though I am a woman, I should certainly not run away for anything," said Agl
aya, in a slightly pained voice. "However, I see you are laughing at me and twis
ting your face up as usual in order to make yourself look more interesting. Now 
tell me, they generally shoot at twenty paces, don't they? At ten, sometimes? I 
suppose if at ten they must be either wounded or killed, mustn't they?"
   "I don't think they often kill each other at duels."
   "They killed Pushkin that way."
   "That may have been an accident."
   "Not a bit of it; it was a duel to the death, and he was killed."
   "The bullet struck so low down that probably his antagonist would never have 
aimed at that part of him-people never do; he would have aimed at his chest or h
ead; so that probably the bullet hit him accidentally. I have been told this by 
competent authorities."
   "Well, a soldier once told me that they were always ordered to aim at the mid
dle of the body. So you see they don't aim at the chest or head; they aim lower 
on purpose. I asked some officer about this afterwards, and he said it was perfe
ctly true."
   "That is probably when they fire from a long distance."
   "Can you shoot at all?"
   "No, I have never shot in my life."
   "Can't you even load a pistol?"
   "No! That is, I understand how it's done, of course, but I have never done it
."
   "Then, you don't know how, for it is a matter that needs practice. Now listen
 and learn; in the first place buy good powder, not damp (they say it mustn't be
 at all damp, but very dry), some fine kind it is-you must ask for PISTOL powder
, not the stuff they load cannons with. They say one makes the bullets oneself, 
somehow or other. Have you got a pistol?"
   "No-and I don't want one," said the prince, laughing.
   "Oh, what NONSENSE! You must buy one. French or English are the best, they sa
y. Then take a little powder, about a thimbleful, or perhaps two, and pour it in
to the barrel. Better put plenty. Then push in a bit of felt (it MUST be felt, f
or some reason or other); you can easily get a bit off some old mattress, or off
 a door; it's used to keep the cold out. Well, when you have pushed the felt dow
n, put the bullet in; do you hear now? The bullet last and the powder first, not
 the other way, or the pistol won't shoot. What are you laughing at? I wish you 
to buy a pistol and practise every day, and you must learn to hit a mark for CER
TAIN; will you?"
   The prince only laughed. Aglaya stamped her foot with annoyance.
   Her serious air, however, during this conversation had surprised him consider
ably. He had a feeling that he ought to be asking her something, that there was 
something he wanted to find out far more important than how to load a pistol; bu
t his thoughts had all scattered, and he was only aware that she was sitting by,
 him, and talking to him, and that he was looking at her; as to what she happene
d to be saying to him, that did not matter in the least.
   The general now appeared on the verandah, coming from upstairs.
   He was on his way out, with an expression of determination on his face, and o
f preoccupation and worry also.
   "Ah! Lef Nicolaievitch, it's you, is it? Where are you off to now?" he asked,
 oblivious of the fact that the prince had not showed the least sign of moving. 
"Come along with me; I want to say a word or two to you."
   "Au revoir, then!" said Aglaya, holding out her hand to the prince.
   It was quite dark now, and Muishkin could not see her face clearly, but a min
ute or two later, when he and the general had left the villa, he suddenly flushe
d up, and squeezed his right hand tightly.
   It appeared that he and the general were going in the same direction. In spit
e of the lateness of the hour, the general was hurrying away to talk to someone 
upon some important subject.
   Meanwhile he talked incessantly but disconnectedly to the prince, and continu
ally brought in the name of Lizabetha Prokofievna.
   If the prince had been in a condition to pay more attention to what the gener
al was saying, he would have discovered that the latter was desirous of drawing 
some information out of him, or indeed of asking him some question outright; but
 that he could not make up his mind to come to the point.
   Muishkin was so absent, that from the very first he could not attend to a wor
d the other was saying; and when the general suddenly stopped before him with so
me excited question, he was obliged to confess, ignominiously, that he did not k
now in the least what he had been talking about.
   The general shrugged his shoulders.
   "How strange everyone, yourself included, has become of late," said he. "I wa
s telling you that I cannot in the least understand Lizabetha Prokofievna's idea
s and agitations. She is in hysterics up there, and moans and says that we have 
been 'shamed and disgraced.' How? Why? When? By whom? I confess that I am very m
uch to blame myself; I do not conceal the fact; but the conduct, the outrageous 
behaviour of this woman, must really be kept within limits, by the police if nec
essary, and I am just on my way now to talk the question over and make some arra
ngements. It can all be managed quietly and gently, even kindly, and without the
 slightest fuss or scandal. I foresee that the future is pregnant with events, a
nd that there is much that needs explanation. There is intrigue in the wind; but
 if on one side nothing is known, on the other side nothing will be explained. I
f I have heard nothing about it, nor have YOU, nor HE, nor SHE-who HAS heard abo
ut it, I should like to know? How CAN all this be explained except by the fact t
hat half of it is mirage or moonshine, or some hallucination of that sort?"
   "SHE is insane," muttered the prince, suddenly recollecting all that had pass
ed, with a spasm of pain at his heart.
   "I too had that idea, and I slept in peace. But now I see that their opinion 
is more correct. I do not believe in the theory of madness! The woman has no com
mon sense; but she is not only not insane, she is artful to a degree. Her outbur
st of this evening about Evgenie's uncle proves that conclusively. It was VILLAI
NOUS, simply jesuitical, and it was all for some special purpose."
   "What about Evgenie's uncle?"
   "My goodness, Lef Nicolaievitch, why, you can't have heard a single word I sa
id! Look at me, I'm still trembling all over with the dreadful shock! It is that
 that kept me in town so late.
   Evgenie Pavlovitch's uncle-"
   Well?" cried the prince.
   "Shot himself this morning, at seven o'clock. A respected, eminent old man of
 seventy; and exactly point for point as she described it; a sum of money, a con
siderable sum of government money, missing!"
   "Why, how could she-"
   "What, know of it? Ha, ha, ha! Why, there was a whole crowd round her the mom
ent she appeared on the scenes here. You know what sort of people surround her n
owadays, and solicit the honour of her 'acquaintance.' Of course she might easil
y have heard the news from someone coming from town. All Petersburg, if not all 
Pavlofsk, knows it by now. Look at the slyness of her observation about Evgenie'
s uniform! I mean, her remark that he had retired just in time! There's a venomo
us hint for you, if you like! No, no! there's no insanity there! Of course I ref
use to believe that Evgenie Pavlovitch could have known beforehand of the catast
rophe; that is, that at such and such a day at seven o'clock, and all that; but 
he might well have had a presentiment of the truth. And I-all of us-Prince S. an
d everybody, believed that he was to inherit a large fortune from this uncle. It
's dreadful, horrible! Mind, I don't suspect Evgenie of anything, be quite clear
 on that point; but the thing is a little suspicious, nevertheless. Prince S. ca
n't get over it. Altogether it is a very extraordinary combination of circumstan
ces."
   "What suspicion attaches to Evgenie Pavlovitch?"
   "Oh, none at all! He has behaved very well indeed. I didn't mean to drop any 
sort of hint. His own fortune is intact, I believe.
   Lizabetha Prokofievna, of course, refuses to listen to anything.
   That's the worst of it all, these family catastrophes or quarrels, or whateve
r you like to call them. You know, prince, you are a friend of the family, so I 
don't mind telling you; it now appears that Evgenie Pavlovitch proposed to Aglay
a a month ago, and was refused."
   "Impossible!" cried the prince.
   "Why? Do you know anything about it? Look here," continued the general, more 
agitated than ever, and trembling with excitement,
   "maybe I have been letting the cat out of the bag too freely with you, if so,
 it is because you are-that sort of man, you know!
   Perhaps you have some special information?"
   "I know nothing about Evgenie Pavlovitch!" said the prince.
   "Nor do I! They always try to bury me underground when there's anything going
 on; they don't seem to reflect that it is unpleasant to a man to be treated so!
 I won't stand it! We have just had a terrible scene!-mind, I speak to you as I 
would to my own son! Aglaya laughs at her mother. Her sisters guessed about Evge
nie having proposed and been rejected, and told Lizabetha.
   "I tell you, my dear fellow, Aglaya is such an extraordinary, such a self-wil
led, fantastical little creature, you wouldn't believe it! Every high quality, e
very brilliant trait of heart and mind, are to be found in her, and, with it all
, so much caprice and mockery, such wild fancies-indeed, a little devil!
   She has just been laughing at her mother to her very face, and at her sisters
, and at Prince S., and everybody-and of course she always laughs at me! You kno
w I love the child-I love her even when she laughs at me, and I believe the wild
 little creature has a special fondness for me for that very reason. She is fond
er of me than any of the others. I dare swear she has had a good laugh at YOU be
fore now! You were having a quiet talk just now, I observed, after all the thund
er and lightning upstairs. She was sitting with you just as though there had bee
n no row at all."
   The prince blushed painfully in the darkness, and closed his right hand tight
ly, but he said nothing.
   "My dear good Prince Lef Nicolaievitch," began the general again, suddenly, "
both I and Lizabetha Prokofievna-(who has begun to respect you once more, and me
 through you, goodness knows why!)-we both love you very sincerely, and esteem y
ou, in spite of any appearances to the contrary. But you'll admit what a riddle 
it must have been for us when that calm, cold, little spitfire, Aglaya-(for she 
stood up to her mother and answered her questions with inexpressible contempt, a
nd mine still more so, because, like a fool, I thought it my duty to assert myse
lf as head of the family)-when Aglaya stood up of a sudden and informed us that 
'that madwoman' (strangely enough, she used exactly the same expression as you d
id) 'has taken it into her head to marry me to Prince Lef Nicolaievitch, and the
refore is doing her best to choke Evgenie Pavlovitch off, and rid the house of h
im.' That's what she said. She would not give the slightest explanation; she bur
st out laughing, banged the door, and went away. We all stood there with our mou
ths open. Well, I was told afterwards of your little passage with Aglaya this af
ternoon, and-and-dear prince-you are a good, sensible fellow, don't be angry if 
I speak out-she is laughing at you, my boy! She is enjoying herself like a child
, at your expense, and therefore, since she is a child, don't be angry with her,
 and don't think anything of it. I assure you, she is simply making a fool of yo
u, just as she does with one and all of us out of pure lack of something better 
to do. Well-good-bye! You know our feelings, don't you-our sincere feelings for 
yourself? They are unalterable, you know, dear boy, under all circumstances, but
-Well, here we part; I must go down to the right. Rarely have I sat so uncomfort
ably in my saddle, as they say, as I now sit. And people talk of the charms of a
 country holiday!"
   Left to himself at the cross-roads, the prince glanced around him, quickly cr
ossed the road towards the lighted window of a neighbouring house, and unfolded 
a tiny scrap of paper which he had held clasped in his right hand during the who
le of his conversation with the general.
   He read the note in the uncertain rays that fell from the window.
   It was as follows:
   "Tomorrow morning, I shall be at the green bench in the park at seven, and sh
all wait there for you. I have made up my mind to speak to you about a most impo
rtant matter which closely concerns yourself.
   "P.S.-I trust that you will not show this note to anyone. Though I am ashamed
 of giving you such instructions, I feel that I must do so, considering what you
 are. I therefore write the words, and blush for your simple character.
   "P.P.S.-It is the same green bench that I showed you before.
   There! aren't you ashamed of yourself? I felt that it was necessary to repeat
 even that information."
   The note was written and folded anyhow, evidently in a great hurry, and proba
bly just before Aglaya had come down to the verandah.
   In inexpressible agitation, amounting almost to fear, the prince slipped quic
kly away from the window, away from the light, like a frightened thief, but as h
e did so he collided violently with some gentleman who seemed to spring from the
 earth at his feet.
   "I was watching for you, prince," said the individual.
   "Is that you, Keller?" said the prince, in surprise.
   "Yes, I've been looking for you. I waited for you at the Epanchins' house, bu
t of course I could not come in. I dogged you from behind as you walked along wi
th the general. Well, prince, here is Keller, absolutely at your service-command
 him!-ready to sacrifice himself-even to die in case of need."
   "But-why?"
   "Oh, why?-Of course you'll be challenged! That was young Lieutenant Moloftsof
f. I know him, or rather of him; he won't pass an insult. He will take no notice
 of Rogojin and myself, and, therefore, you are the only one left to account for
. You'll have to pay the piper, prince. He has been asking about you, and undoub
tedly his friend will call on you tomorrow-perhaps he is at your house already. 
If you would do me the honour to have me for a second, prince, I should be happy
. That's why I have been looking for you now."
   "Duel! You've come to talk about a duel, too!" The prince burst out laughing,
 to the great astonishment of Keller. He laughed unrestrainedly, and Keller, who
 had been on pins and needles, and in a fever of excitement to offer himself as 
"second," was very near being offended.
   "You caught him by the arms, you know, prince. No man of proper pride can sta
nd that sort of treatment in public."
   "Yes, and he gave me a fearful dig in the chest," cried the prince, still lau
ghing. "What are we to fight about? I shall beg his pardon, that's all. But if w
e must fight-we'll fight! Let him have a shot at me, by all means; I should rath
er like it. Ha, ha, ha! I know how to load a pistol now; do you know how to load
 a pistol, Keller? First, you have to buy the powder, you know; it mustn't be we
t, and it mustn't be that coarse stuff that they load cannons with-it must be pi
stol powder. Then you pour the powder in, and get hold of a bit of felt from som
e door, and then shove the bullet in. But don't shove the bullet in before the p
owder, because the thing wouldn't go off-do you hear, Keller, the thing wouldn't
 go off! Ha, ha, ha! Isn't that a grand reason, Keller, my friend, eh? Do you kn
ow, my dear fellow, I really must kiss you, and embrace you, this very moment. H
a, ha! How was it you so suddenly popped up in front of me as you did? Come to m
y house as soon as you can, and we'll have some champagne. We'll all get drunk! 
Do you know I have a dozen of champagne in Lebedeff's cellar? Lebedeff sold them
 to me the day after I arrived. I took the lot. We'll invite everybody! Are you 
going to do any sleeping tonight?"
   "As much as usual, prince-why?"
   "Pleasant dreams then-ha, ha!"
   The prince crossed the road, and disappeared into the park, leaving the aston
ished Keller in a state of ludicrous wonder. He had never before seen the prince
 in such a strange condition of mind, and could not have imagined the possibilit
y of it.
   "Fever, probably," he said to himself, "for the man is all nerves, and this b
usiness has been a little too much for him. He is not AFRAID, that's clear; that
 sort never funks! H'm! champagne! That was an interesting item of news, at all 
events!-Twelve bottles! Dear me, that's a very respectable little stock indeed! 
I bet anything Lebedeff lent somebody money on deposit of this dozen of champagn
e. Hum! he's a nice fellow, is this prince!
   I like this sort of man. Well, I needn't be wasting time here, and if it's a 
case of champagne, why-there's no time like the present!"
   That the prince was almost in a fever was no more than the truth.
   He wandered about the park for a long while, and at last came to himself in a
 lonely avenue. He was vaguely conscious that he had already paced this particul
ar walk-from that large, dark tree to the bench at the other end-about a hundred
 yards altogether-at least thirty times backwards and forwards.
   As to recollecting what he had been thinking of all that time, he could not. 
He caught himself, however, indulging in one thought which made him roar with la
ughter, though there was nothing really to laugh at in it; but he felt that he m
ust laugh, and go on laughing.
   It struck him that the idea of the duel might not have occurred to Keller alo
ne, but that his lesson in the art of pistol-loading might have been not altoget
her accidental! "Pooh! nonsense!" he said to himself, struck by another thought,
 of a sudden. "Why, she was immensely surprised to find me there on the verandah
, and laughed and talked about TEA! And yet she had this little note in her hand
, therefore she must have known that I was sitting there.
   So why was she surprised? Ha, ha, ha!"
   He pulled the note out and kissed it; then paused and reflected.
   "How strange it all is! how strange!" he muttered, melancholy enough now. In 
moments of great joy, he invariably felt a sensation of melancholy come over him
-he could not tell why.
   He looked intently around him, and wondered why he had come here; he was very
 tired, so he approached the bench and sat down on it.
   Around him was profound silence; the music in the Vauxhall was over. The park
 seemed quite empty, though it was not, in reality, later than half-past eleven.
 It was a quiet, warm, clear night-a real Petersburg night of early June; but in
 the dense avenue, where he was sitting, it was almost pitch dark.
   If anyone had come up at this moment and told him that he was in love, passio
nately in love, he would have rejected the idea with astonishment, and, perhaps,
 with irritation. And if anyone had added that Aglaya's note was a love-letter, 
and that it contained an appointment to a lover's rendezvous, he would have blus
hed with shame for the speaker, and, probably, have challenged him to a duel.
   All this would have been perfectly sincere on his part. He had never for a mo
ment entertained the idea of the possibility of this girl loving him, or even of
 such a thing as himself falling in love with her. The possibility of being love
d himself, "a man like me," as he put it, he ranked among ridiculous supposition
s.
   It appeared to him that it was simply a joke on Aglaya's part, if there reall
y were anything in it at all; but that seemed to him quite natural. His preoccup
ation was caused by something different.
   As to the few words which the general had let slip about Aglaya laughing at e
verybody, and at himself most of all-he entirely believed them. He did not feel 
the slightest sensation of offence; on the contrary, he was quite certain that i
t was as it should be.
   His whole thoughts were now as to next morning early; he would see her; he wo
uld sit by her on that little green bench, and listen to how pistols were loaded
, and look at her. He wanted nothing more.
   The question as to what she might have to say of special interest to himself 
occurred to him once or twice. He did not doubt, for a moment, that she really h
ad some such subject of conversation in store, but so very little interested in 
the matter was he that it did not strike him to wonder what it could be. The cru
nch of gravel on the path suddenly caused him to raise his head.
   A man, whose face it was difficult to see in the gloom, approached the bench,
 and sat down beside him. The prince peered into his face, and recognized the li
vid features of Rogojin.
   "I knew you'd be wandering about somewhere here. I didn't have to look for yo
u very long," muttered the latter between his teeth.
   It was the first time they had met since the encounter on the staircase at th
e hotel.
   Painfully surprised as he was at this sudden apparition of Rogojin, the princ
e, for some little while, was unable to collect his thoughts. Rogojin, evidently
, saw and understood the impression he had made; and though he seemed more or le
ss confused at first, yet he began talking with what looked like assumed ease an
d freedom. However, the prince soon changed his mind on this score, and thought 
that there was not only no affectation of indifference, but that Rogojin was not
 even particularly agitated. If there were a little apparent awkwardness, it was
 only in his words and gestures. The man could not change his heart.
   "How did you-find me here?" asked the prince for the sake of saying something
.
   "Keller told me (I found him at your place) that you were in the park. 'Of co
urse he is!' I thought."
   "Why so?" asked the prince uneasily.
   Rogojin smiled, but did not explain.
   "I received your letter, Lef Nicolaievitch-what's the good of all that?-It's 
no use, you know. I've come to you from HER,-she bade me tell you that she must 
see you, she has something to say to you. She told me to find you today."
   "I'll come tomorrow. Now I'm going home-are you coming to my house?"
   "Why should I? I've given you the message.-Goodbye!"
   "Won't you come?" asked the prince in a gentle voice.
   "What an extraordinary man you are! I wonder at you!" Rogojin laughed sarcast
ically.
   "Why do you hate me so?" asked the prince, sadly. "You know yourself that all
 you suspected is quite unfounded. I felt you were still angry with me, though. 
Do you know why? Because you tried to kill me-that's why you can't shake off you
r wrath against me. I tell you that I only remember the Parfen Rogojin with whom
 I exchanged crosses, and vowed brotherhood. I wrote you this in yesterday's let
ter, in order that you might forget all that madness on your part, and that you 
might not feel called to talk about it when we met. Why do you avoid me? Why do 
you hold your hand back from me? I tell you again, I consider all that has passe
d a delirium, an insane dream. I can understand all you did, and all you felt th
at day, as if it were myself. What you were then imagining was not the case, and
 could never be the case.
   Why, then, should there be anger between us?"
   "You don't know what anger is!" laughed Rogojin, in reply to the prince's hea
ted words.
   He had moved a pace or two away, and was hiding his hands behind him.
   "No, it is impossible for me to come to your house again," he added slowly.
   "Why? Do you hate me so much as all that?"
   "I don't love you, Lef Nicolaievitch, and, therefore, what would be the use o
f my coming to see you? You are just like a child-you want a plaything, and it m
ust be taken out and given you-and then you don't know how to work it. You are s
imply repeating all you said in your letter, and what's the use? Of course I bel
ieve every word you say, and I know perfectly well that you neither did or ever 
can deceive me in any way, and yet, I don't love you.
   You write that you've forgotten everything, and only remember your brother Pa
rfen, with whom you exchanged crosses, and that you don't remember anything abou
t the Rogojin who aimed a knife at your throat. What do you know about my feelin
gs, eh?" (Rogojin laughed disagreeably.) "Here you are holding out your brotherl
y forgiveness to me for a thing that I have perhaps never repented of in the sli
ghtest degree. I did not think of it again all that evening; all my thoughts wer
e centred on something else-"
   "Not think of it again? Of course you didn't!" cried the prince.
   "And I dare swear that you came straight away down here to Pavlofsk to listen
 to the music and dog her about in the crowd, and stare at her, just as you did 
today. There's nothing surprising in that! If you hadn't been in that condition 
of mind that you could think of nothing but one subject, you would, probably, ne
ver have raised your knife against me. I had a presentiment of what you would do
, that day, ever since I saw you first in the morning. Do you know yourself what
 you looked like?
   I knew you would try to murder me even at the very moment when we exchanged c
rosses. What did you take me to your mother for? Did you think to stay your hand
 by doing so? Perhaps you did not put your thoughts into words, but you and I we
re thinking the same thing, or feeling the same thing looming over us, at the sa
me moment. What should you think of me now if you had not raised your knife to m
e-the knife which God averted from my throat? I would have been guilty of suspec
ting you all the same-and you would have intended the murder all the same; there
fore we should have been mutually guilty in any case. Come, don't frown; you nee
dn't laugh at me, either. You say you haven't 'repented.'
   Repented! You probably couldn't, if you were to try; you dislike me too much 
for that. Why, if I were an angel of light, and as innocent before you as a babe
, you would still loathe me if you believed that SHE loved me, instead of loving
 yourself. That's jealousy-that is the real jealousy.
   "But do you know what I have been thinking out during this last week, Parfen?
 I'll tell you. What if she loves you now better than anyone? And what if she to
rments you BECAUSE she loves you, and in proportion to her love for you, so she 
torments you the more? She won't tell you this, of course; you must have eyes to
 see. Why do you suppose she consents to marry you? She must have a reason, and 
that reason she will tell you some day. Some women desire the kind of love you g
ive her, and she is probably one of these. Your love and your wild nature impres
s her. Do you know that a woman is capable of driving a man crazy almost, with h
er cruelties and mockeries, and feels not one single pang of regret, because she
 looks at him and says to herself, 'There! I'll torment this man nearly into his
 grave, and then, oh! how I'll compensate him for it all with my love!'"
   Rogojin listened to the end, and then burst out laughing:
   "Why, prince, I declare you must have had a taste of this sort of thing yours
elf-haven't you? I have heard tell of something of the kind, you know; is it tru
e?"
   "What? What can you have heard?" said the prince, stammering.
   Rogojin continued to laugh loudly. He had listened to the prince's speech wit
h curiosity and some satisfaction. The speaker's impulsive warmth had surprised 
and even comforted him.
   "Why, I've not only heard of it; I see it for myself," he said.
   "When have you ever spoken like that before? It wasn't like yourself, prince.
 Why, if I hadn't heard this report about you, I should never have come all this
 way into the park-at midnight, too!"
   "I don't understand you in the least, Parfen."
   "Oh, SHE told me all about it long ago, and tonight I saw for myself. I saw y
ou at the music, you know, and whom you were sitting with. She swore to me yeste
rday, and again today, that you are madly in love with Aglaya Ivanovna. But that
's all the same to me, prince, and it's not my affair at all; for if you have ce
ased to love HER, SHE has not ceased to love YOU. You know, of course, that she 
wants to marry you to that girl? She's sworn to it! Ha, ha! She says to me, 'Unt
il then I won't marry you. When they go to church, we'll go too-and not before.'
 What on earth does she mean by it? I don't know, and I never did.
   Either she loves you without limits or-yet, if she loves you, why does she wi
sh to marry you to another girl? She says, 'I want to see him happy,' which is t
o say-she loves you."
   "I wrote, and I say to you once more, that she is not in her right mind," sai
d the prince, who had listened with anguish to what Rogojin said.
   "Goodness knows-you may be wrong there! At all events, she named the day this
 evening, as we left the gardens. 'In three weeks,' says she, 'and perhaps soone
r, we shall be married.' She swore to it, took off her cross and kissed it. So i
t all depends upon you now, prince, You see! Ha, ha!"
   "That's all madness. What you say about me, Parfen, never can and never will 
be. Tomorrow, I shall come and see you-"
   "How can she be mad," Rogojin interrupted, "when she is sane enough for other
 people and only mad for you? How can she write letters to HER, if she's mad? If
 she were insane they would observe it in her letters."
   "What letters?" said the prince, alarmed.
   "She writes to HER-and the girl reads the letters. Haven't you heard?-You are
 sure to hear; she's sure to show you the letters herself."
   "I won't believe this!" cried the prince.
   "Why, prince, you've only gone a few steps along this road, I perceive. You a
re evidently a mere beginner. Wait a bit! Before long, you'll have your own dete
ctives, you'll watch day and night, and you'll know every little thing that goes
 on there-that is, if-"
   "Drop that subject, Rogojin, and never mention it again. And listen: as I hav
e sat here, and talked, and listened, it has suddenly struck me that tomorrow is
 my birthday. It must be about twelve o'clock, now; come home with me-do, and we
'll see the day in! We'll have some wine, and you shall wish me-I don't know wha
t-but you, especially you, must wish me a good wish, and I shall wish you full h
appiness in return. Otherwise, hand me my cross back again. You didn't return it
 to me next day. Haven't you got it on now?"
   "Yes, I have," said Rogojin.
   "Come along, then. I don't wish to meet my new year without you-my new life, 
I should say, for a new life is beginning for me.
   Did you know, Parfen, that a new life had begun for me?"
   "I see for myself that it is so-and I shall tell HER. But you are not quite y
ourself, Lef Nicolaievitch."
      IV.
   THE prince observed with great surprise, as he approached his villa, accompan
ied by Rogojin, that a large number of people were assembled on his verandah, wh
ich was brilliantly lighted up. The company seemed merry and were noisily laughi
ng and talking-even quarrelling, to judge from the sounds. At all events they we
re clearly enjoying themselves, and the prince observed further on closer invest
igation-that all had been drinking champagne. To judge from the lively condition
 of some of the party, it was to be supposed that a considerable quantity of cha
mpagne had been consumed already.
   All the guests were known to the prince; but the curious part of the matter w
as that they had all arrived on the same evening, as though with one accord, alt
hough he had only himself recollected the fact that it was his birthday a few mo
ments since.
   "You must have told somebody you were going to trot out the champagne, and th
at's why they are all come!" muttered Rogojin, as the two entered the verandah. 
"We know all about that! You've only to whistle and they come up in shoals!" he 
continued, almost angrily. He was doubtless thinking of his own late experiences
 with his boon companions.
   All surrounded the prince with exclamations of welcome, and, on hearing that 
it was his birthday, with cries of congratulation and delight; many of them were
 very noisy.
   The presence of certain of those in the room surprised the prince vastly, but
 the guest whose advent filled him with the greatest wonder-almost amounting to 
alarm-was Evgenie Pavlovitch. The prince could not believe his eyes when he behe
ld the latter, and could not help thinking that something was wrong.
   Lebedeff ran up promptly to explain the arrival of all these gentlemen. He wa
s himself somewhat intoxicated, but the prince gathered from his long-winded per
iods that the party had assembled quite naturally, and accidentally.
   First of all Hippolyte had arrived, early in the evening, and feeling decided
ly better, had determined to await the prince on the verandah. There Lebedeff ha
d joined him, and his household had followed-that is, his daughters and General 
Ivolgin.
   Burdovsky had brought Hippolyte, and stayed on with him. Gania and Ptitsin ha
d dropped in accidentally later on; then came Keller, and he and Colia insisted 
on having champagne. Evgenie Pavlovitch had only dropped in half an hour or so a
go. Lebedeff had served the champagne readily.
   "My own though, prince, my own, mind," he said, "and there'll be some supper 
later on; my daughter is getting it ready now. Come and sit down, prince, we are
 all waiting for you, we want you with us. Fancy what we have been discussing! Y
ou know the question, 'to be or not to be,'-out of Hamlet! A contemporary theme!
 Quite up-to-date! Mr. Hippolyte has been eloquent to a degree. He won't go to b
ed, but he has only drunk a little champagne, and that can't do him any harm. Co
me along, prince, and settle the question. Everyone is waiting for you, sighing 
for the light of your luminous intelligence"
   The prince noticed the sweet, welcoming look on Vera Lebedeff's face, as she 
made her way towards him through the crowd. He held out his hand to her. She too
k it, blushing with delight, and wished him "a happy life from that day forward.
" Then she ran off to the kitchen, where. her presence was necessary to help in 
the preparations for supper. Before the prince's arrival she had spent some time
 on the terrace, listening eagerly to the conversation, though the visitors, mos
tly under the influence of wine, were discussing abstract subjects far beyond he
r comprehension. In the next room her younger sister lay on a wooden chest, soun
d asleep, with her mouth wide open; but the boy, Lebedeff's son, had taken up hi
s position close beside Colia and Hippolyte, his face lit up with interest in th
e conversation of his father and the rest, to which he would willingly have list
ened for ten hours at a stretch.
   "I have waited for you on purpose, and am very glad to see you arrive so happ
y," said Hippolyte, when the prince came forward to press his hand, immediately 
after greeting Vera.
   "And how do you know that I am 'so happy'?
   "I can see it by your face! Say 'how do you do' to the others, and come and s
it down here, quick-I've been waiting for you!" he added, accentuating the fact 
that he had waited. On the prince's asking, "Will it not be injurious to you to 
sit out so late?" he replied that he could not believe that he had thought himse
lf dying three days or so ago, for he never had felt better than this evening.
   Burdovsky next jumped up and explained that he had come in by accident, havin
g escorted Hippolyte from town. He murmured that he was glad he had "written non
sense" in his letter, and then pressed the prince's hand warmly and sat down aga
in.
   The prince approached Evgenie Pavlovitch last of all. The latter immediately 
took his arm.
   "I have a couple of words to say to you," he began, "and those on a very impo
rtant matter; let's go aside for a minute or two."
   "Just a couple of words!" whispered another voice in the prince's other ear, 
and another hand took his other arm. Muishkin turned, and to his great surprise 
observed a red, flushed face and a droll-looking figure which he recognized at o
nce as that of Ferdishenko. Goodness knows where he had turned up from!
   "Do you remember Ferdishenko?" he asked.
   "Where have you dropped from?" cried the prince.
   "He is sorry for his sins now, prince," cried Keller. "He did not want to let
 you know he was here; he was hidden over there in the corner,-but he repents no
w, he feels his guilt."
   "Why, what has he done?"
   "I met him outside and brought him in-he's a gentleman who doesn't often allo
w his friends to see him, of late-but he's sorry now."
   "Delighted, I'm sure!-I'll come back directly, gentlemen,-sit down there with
 the others, please,-excuse me one moment," said the host, getting away with dif
ficulty in order to follow Evgenie.
   "You are very gay here," began the latter, "and I have had quite a pleasant h
alf-hour while I waited for you. Now then, my dear Lef Nicolaievitch, this is wh
at's the matter. I've arranged it all with Moloftsoff, and have just come in to 
relieve your mind on that score. You need be under no apprehensions. He was very
 sensible, as he should be, of course, for I think he was entirely to blame hims
elf."
   "What Moloftsoff?"
   "The young fellow whose arms you held, don't you know? He was so wild with yo
u that he was going to send a friend to you tomorrow morning."
   "What nonsense!"
   "Of course it is nonsense, and in nonsense it would have ended, doubtless; bu
t you know these fellows, they-"
   "Excuse me, but I think you must have something else that you wished to speak
 about, Evgenie Pavlovitch?"
   "Of course, I have!" said the other, laughing. "You see, my dear fellow, tomo
rrow, very early in the morning, I must be off to town about this unfortunate bu
siness(my uncle, you know!). Just imagine, my dear sir, it is all true-word for 
word-and, of course, everybody knew it excepting myself. All this has been such 
a blow to me that I have not managed to call in at the Epanchins'. Tomorrow I sh
all not see them either, because I shall be in town. I may not be here for three
 days or more; in a word, my affairs are a little out of gear. But though my tow
n business is, of course, most pressing, still I determined not to go away until
 I had seen you, and had a clear understanding with you upon certain points; and
 that without loss of time. I will wait now, if you will allow me, until the com
pany departs; I may just as well, for I have nowhere else to go to, and I shall 
certainly not do any sleeping tonight; I'm far too excited. And finally, I must 
confess that, though I know it is bad form to pursue a man in this way, I have c
ome to beg your friendship, my dear prince. You are an unusual sort of a person;
 you don't lie at every step, as some men do; in fact, you don't lie at all, and
 there is a matter in which I need a true and sincere friend, for I really may c
laim to be among the number of bona fide unfortunates just now."
   He laughed again.
   "But the trouble is," said the prince, after a slight pause for reflection, "
that goodness only knows when this party will break up. Hadn't we better stroll 
into the park? I'll excuse myself, there's no danger of their going away."
   "No, no! I have my reasons for wishing them not to suspect us of being engage
d in any specially important conversation. There are gentry present who are a li
ttle too much interested in us. You are not aware of that perhaps, prince? It wi
ll be a great deal better if they see that we are friendly just in an ordinary w
ay.
   They'll all go in a couple of hours, and then I'll ask you to give me twenty 
minutes-half an hour at most."
   "By all means! I assure you I am delighted-you need not have entered into all
 these explanations. As for your remarks about friendship with me-thanks, very m
uch indeed. You must excuse my being a little absent this evening. Do you know, 
I cannot somehow be attentive to anything just now?"
   "I see, I see," said Evgenie, smiling gently. His mirth seemed very near the 
surface this evening.
   "What do you see?" said the prince, startled.
   "I don't want you to suspect that I have simply come here to deceive you and 
pump information out of you!" said Evgenie, still smiling, and without making an
y direct reply to the question.
   "Oh, but I haven't the slightest doubt that you did come to pump me," said th
e prince, laughing himself, at last; "and I dare say you are quite prepared to d
eceive me too, so far as that goes.
   But what of that? I'm not afraid of you; besides, you'll hardly believe it, I
 feel as though I really didn't care a scrap one way or the other, just now!-And
-and-and as you are a capital fellow, I am convinced of that, I dare say we real
ly shall end by being good friends. I like you very much Evgenie Pavlovitch; I c
onsider you a very good fellow indeed."
   "Well, in any case, you are a most delightful man to have to deal with, be th
e business what it may," concluded Evgenie. "Come along now, I'll drink a glass 
to your health. I'm charmed to have entered into alliance with you. By-the-by," 
he added suddenly, has this young Hippolyte come down to stay with you "Yes."
   "He's not going to die at once, I should think, is he?"
   "Why?"
   "Oh, I don't know. I've been half an hour here with him, and he-"
   Hippolyte had been waiting for the prince all this time, and had never ceased
 looking at him and Evgenie Pavlovitch as they conversed in the corner. He becam
e much excited when they approached the table once more. He was disturbed in his
 mind, it seemed; perspiration stood in large drops on his forehead; in his glea
ming eyes it was easy to read impatience and agitation; his gaze wandered from f
ace to face of those present, and from object to object in the room, apparently 
without aim. He had taken a part, and an animated one, in the noisy conversation
 of the company; but his animation was clearly the outcome of fever. His talk wa
s almost incoherent; he would break off in the middle of a sentence which he had
 begun with great interest, and forget what he had been saying. The prince disco
vered to his dismay that Hippolyte had been allowed to drink two large glasses o
f champagne; the one now standing by him being the third. All this he found out 
afterwards; at the moment he did not notice anything, very particularly.
   "Do you know I am specially glad that today is your birthday!" cried Hippolyt
e.
   "Why?"
   "You'll soon see. D'you know I had a feeling that there would be a lot of peo
ple here tonight? It's not the first time that my presentiments have been fulfil
led. I wish I had known it was your birthday, I'd have brought you a present-per
haps I have got a present for you! Who knows? Ha, ha! How long is it now before 
daylight?"
   "Not a couple of hours," said Ptitsin, looking at his watch.
   What's the good of daylight now? One can read all night in the open air witho
ut it," said someone.
   "The good of it! Well, I want just to see a ray of the sun," said Hippolyte. 
Can one drink to the sun's health, do you think, prince?"
   "Oh, I dare say one can; but you had better be calm and lie down, Hippolyte-t
hat's much more important.
   "You are always preaching about resting; you are a regular nurse to me, princ
e. As soon as the sun begins to 'resound' in the sky -what poet said that? 'The 
sun resounded in the sky.' It is beautiful, though there's no sense in it!-then 
we will go to bed. Lebedeff, tell me, is the sun the source of life? What does t
he source, or 'spring,' of life really mean in the Apocalypse?
   You have heard of the 'Star that is called Wormwood,' prince?"
   "I have heard that Lebedeff explains it as the railroads that cover Europe li
ke a net."
   Everybody laughed, and Lebedeff got up abruptly.
   "No! Allow me, that is not what we are discussing!" he cried, waving his hand
 to impose silence. "Allow me! With these gentlemen all these gentlemen," he adde
d, suddenly addressing the prince, "on certain points that is" He thumped the tabl
e repeatedly, and the laughter increased. Lebedeff was in his usual evening cond
ition, and had just ended a long and scientific argument, which had left him exc
ited and irritable. On such occasions he was apt to evince a supreme contempt fo
r his opponents.
   "It is not right! Half an hour ago, prince, it was agreed among us that no on
e should interrupt, no one should laugh, that each person was to express his tho
ughts freely; and then at the end, when everyone had spoken, objections might be
 made, even by the atheists. We chose the general as president. Now without some
 such rule and order, anyone might be shouted down, even in the loftiest and mos
t profound thought"
   "Go on! Go on! Nobody is going to interrupt you!" cried several voices.
   "Speak, but keep to the point!"
   "What is this 'star'?" asked another.
   I have no idea," replied General Ivolgin, who presided with much gravity.
   "I love these arguments, prince," said Keller, also more than half intoxicate
d, moving restlessly in his chair. "Scientific and political." Then, turning sud
denly towards Evgenie Pavlovitch, who was seated near him: "Do you know, I simpl
y adore reading the accounts of the debates in the English parliament. Not that 
the discussions themselves interest me; I am not a politician, you know; but it 
delights me to see how they address each other 'the noble lord who agrees with m
e,' 'my honourable opponent who astonished Europe with his proposal,' 'the noble
 viscount sitting opposite'-all these expressions, all this parliamentarism of a
 free people, has an enormous attraction for me. It fascinates me, prince. I hav
e always been an artist in the depths of my soul, I assure you, Evgenie Pavlovit
ch."
   "Do you mean to say," cried Gania, from the other corner, "do you mean to say
 that railways are accursed inventions, that they are a source of ruin to humani
ty, a poison poured upon the earth to corrupt the springs of life?"
   Gavrila Ardalionovitch was in high spirits that evening, and it seemed to the
 prince that his gaiety was mingled with triumph. Of course he was only joking w
ith Lebedeff, meaning to egg him on, but he grew excited himself at the same tim
e.
   "Not the railways, oh dear, no!" replied Lebedeff, with a mixture of violent 
anger and extreme enjoyment. "Considered alone, the railways will not pollute th
e springs of life, but as a whole they are accursed. The whole tendency of our l
atest centuries, in its scientific and materialistic aspect, is most probably ac
cursed."
   "Is it certainly accursed? or do you only mean it might be?
   That is an important point," said Evgenie Pavlovitch.
   "It is accursed, certainly accursed!" replied the clerk, vehemently.
   "Don't go so fast, Lebedeff; you are much milder in the morning," said Ptitsi
n, smiling.
   "But, on the other hand, more frank in the evening! In the evening sincere an
d frank," repeated Lebedeff, earnestly. "More candid, more exact, more honest, m
ore honourable, and although I may show you my weak side, I challenge you all; yo
u atheists, for instance! How are you going to save the world? How find a straig
ht road of progress, you men of science, of industry, of cooperation, of trades 
unions, and all the rest?
   How are you going to save it, I say? By what? By credit? What is credit? To w
hat will credit lead you?"
   "You are too inquisitive," remarked Evgenie Pavlovitch.
   "Well, anyone who does not interest himself in questions such as this is, in 
my opinion, a mere fashionable dummy."
   "But it will lead at least to solidarity, and balance of interests," said Pti
tsin.
   "You will reach that with nothing to help you but credit? Without recourse to
 any moral principle, having for your foundation only individual selfishness, an
d the satisfaction of material desires?
   Universal peace, and the happiness of mankind as a whole, being the result! I
s it really so that I may understand you, sir?"
   "But the universal necessity of living, of drinking, of eating-in short, the 
whole scientific conviction that this necessity can only be satisfied by univers
al co-operation and the solidarity of interests-is, it seems to me, a strong eno
ugh idea to serve as a basis, so to speak, and a 'spring of life,' for humanity 
in future centuries," said Gavrila Ardalionovitch, now thoroughly roused.
   "The necessity of eating and drinking, that is to say, solely the instinct of
 self-preservation"
   "Is not that enough? The instinct of self-preservation is the normal law of h
umanity"
   "Who told you that?" broke in Evgenie Pavlovitch.
   "It is a law, doubtless, but a law neither more nor less normal than that of 
destruction, even self-destruction. Is it possible that the whole normal law of 
humanity is contained in this sentiment of self-preservation?"
   "Ah!" cried Hippolyte, turning towards Evgenie Pavlovitch, and looking at him
 with a queer sort of curiosity.
   Then seeing that Radomski was laughing, he began to laugh himself, nudged Col
ia, who was sitting beside him, with his elbow, and again asked what time it was
. He even pulled Colia's silver watch out of his hand, and looked at it eagerly.
 Then, as if he had forgotten everything, he stretched himself out on the sofa, 
put his hands behind his head, and looked up at the sky.
   After a minute or two he got up and came back to the table to listen to Lebed
eff's outpourings, as the latter passionately commentated on Evgenie Pavlovitch'
s paradox.
   "That is an artful and traitorous idea. A smart notion," vociferated the cler
k, "thrown out as an apple of discord. But it is just. You are a scoffer, a man 
of the world, a cavalry officer, and, though not without brains, you do not real
ize how profound is your thought, nor how true. Yes, the laws of selfpreservatio
n and of self-destruction are equally powerful in this world. The devil will hol
d his empire over humanity until a limit of time which is still unknown. You lau
gh? You do not believe in the devil? Scepticism as to the devil is a French idea
, and it is also a frivolous idea. Do you know who the devil is? Do you know his
 name? Although you don't know his name you make a mockery of his form, followin
g the example of Voltaire. You sneer at his hoofs, at his tail, at his horns-all
 of them the produce of your imagination! In reality the devil is a great and te
rrible spirit, with neither hoofs, nor tail, nor horns; it is you who have endow
ed him with these attributes! But he is not the question just now!"
   "How do you know he is not the question now?" cried Hippolyte, laughing hyste
rically.
   "Another excellent idea, and worth considering!" replied Lebedeff. "But, agai
n, that is not the question. The question at this moment is whether we have not 
weakened 'the springs of life' by the extension"
   "Of railways?" put in Colia eagerly.
   "Not railways, properly speaking, presumptuous youth, but the general tendenc
y of which railways may be considered as the outward expression and symbol. We h
urry and push and hustle, for the good of humanity! 'The world is becoming too n
oisy, too commercial!' groans some solitary thinker. 'Undoubtedly it is, but the
 noise of waggons bearing bread to starving humanity is of more value than tranq
uillity of soul,' replies another triumphantly, and passes on with an air of pri
de. As for me, I don't believe in these waggons bringing bread to humanity. For,
 founded on no moral principle, these may well, even in the act of carrying brea
d to humanity, coldly exclude a considerable portion of humanity from enjoying i
t; that has been seen more than once.
   "What, these waggons may coldly exclude?" repeated someone.
   "That has been seen already," continued Lebedeff, not deigning to notice the 
interruption. "Malthus was a friend of humanity, but, with ill-founded moral pri
nciples, the friend of humanity is the devourer of humanity, without mentioning 
his pride; for, touch the vanity of one of these numberless philanthropists, and
 to avenge his self-esteem, he will be ready at once to set fire to the whole gl
obe; and to tell the truth, we are all more or less like that. I, perhaps, might
 be the first to set a light to the fuel, and then run away. But, again, I must 
repeat, that is not the question."
   "What is it then, for goodness' sake?"
   "He is boring us!"
   "The question is connected with the following anecdote of past times; for I a
m obliged to relate a story. In our times, and in our country, which I hope you 
love as much as I do, for as far as I am concerned, I am ready to shed the last 
drop of my blood
   "Go on! Go on!"
   "In our dear country, as indeed in the whole of Europe, a famine visits human
ity about four times a century, as far as I can remember; once in every twenty-f
ive years. I won't swear to this being the exact figure, but anyhow they have be
come comparatively rare."
   "Comparatively to what?"
   "To the twelfth century, and those immediately preceding and following it. We
 are told by historians that widespread famines occurred in those days every two
 or three years, and such was the condition of things that men actually had reco
urse to cannibalism, in secret, of course. One of these cannibals, who had reach
ed a good age, declared of his own free will that during the course of his long 
and miserable life he had personally killed and eaten, in the most profound secr
ecy, sixty monks, not to mention several children; the number of the latter he t
hought was about six, an insignificant total when compared with the enormous mas
s of ecclesiastics consumed by him. As to adults, laymen that is to say, he had 
never touched them."
   The president joined in the general outcry.
   "That's impossible!" said he in an aggrieved tone. "I am often discussing sub
jects of this nature with him, gentlemen, but for the most part he talks nonsens
e enough to make one deaf: this story has no pretence of being true."
   "General, remember the siege of Kars! And you, gentlemen, I assure you my ane
cdote is the naked truth. I may remark that reality, although it is governed by 
invariable law, has at times a resemblance to falsehood. In fact, the truer a th
ing is the less true it sounds."
   "But could anyone possibly eat sixty monks?" objected the scoffing listeners.
   "It is quite clear that he did not eat them all at once, but in a space of fi
fteen or twenty years: from that point of view the thing is comprehensible and n
atural"
   "Natural?"
   "And natural," repeated Lebedeff with pedantic obstinacy.
   "Besides, a Catholic monk is by nature excessively curious; it would be quite
 easy therefore to entice him into a wood, or some secret place, on false preten
ces, and there to deal with him as said. But I do not dispute in the least that 
the number of persons consumed appears to denote a spice of greediness."
   "It is perhaps true, gentlemen," said the prince, quietly. He had been listen
ing in silence up to that moment without taking part in the conversation, but la
ughing heartily with the others from time to time. Evidently he was delighted to
 see that everybody was amused, that everybody was talking at once, and even tha
t everybody was drinking. It seemed as if he were not intending to speak at all,
 when suddenly he intervened in such a serious voice that everyone looked at him
 with interest.
   "It is true that there were frequent famines at that time, gentlemen. I have 
often heard of them, though I do not know much history. But it seems to me that 
it must have been so. When I was in Switzerland I used to look with astonishment
 at the many ruins of feudal castles perched on the top of steep and rocky heigh
ts, half a mile at least above sea-level, so that to reach them one had to climb
 many miles of stony tracks. A castle, as you know, is, a kind of mountain of st
ones-a dreadful, almost an impossible, labour! Doubtless the builders were all p
oor men, vassals, and had to pay heavy taxes, and to keep up the priesthood. How
, then, could they provide for themselves, and when had they time to plough and 
sow their fields? The greater number must, literally, have died of starvation. I
 have sometimes asked myself how it was that these communities were not utterly 
swept off the face of the earth, and how they could possibly survive. Lebedeff i
s not mistaken, in my opinion, when he says that there were cannibals in those d
ays, perhaps in considerable numbers; but I do not understand why he should have
 dragged in the monks, nor what he means by that."
   "It is undoubtedly because, in the twelfth century, monks were the only peopl
e one could eat; they were the fat, among many lean," said Gavrila Ardalionovitc
h.
   "A brilliant idea, and most true!" cried Lebedeff, "for he never even touched
 the laity. Sixty monks, and not a single layman! It is a terrible idea, but it 
is historic, it is statistic; it is indeed one of those facts which enables an i
ntelligent historian to reconstruct the physiognomy of a special epoch, for it b
rings out this further point with mathematical accuracy, that the clergy were in
 those days sixty times richer and more flourishing than the rest of humanity. a
nd perhaps sixty times fatter also"
   "You are exaggerating, you are exaggerating, Lebedeff!" cried his hearers, am
id laughter.
   "I admit that it is an historic thought, but what is your conclusion?" asked 
the prince.
   He spoke so seriously in addressing Lebedeff, that his tone contrasted quite 
comically with that of the others. They were very nearly laughing at him, too, b
ut he did not notice it.
   "Don't you see he is a lunatic, prince?" whispered Evgenie Pavlovitch in his 
ear. "Someone told me just now that he is a bit touched on the subject of lawyer
s, that he has a mania for making speeches and intends to pass the examinations.
 I am expecting a splendid burlesque now."
   "My conclusion is vast," replied Lebedeff, in a voice like thunder. "Let us e
xamine first the psychological and legal position of the criminal. We see that i
n spite of the difficulty of finding other food, the accused, or, as we may say,
 my client, has often during his peculiar life exhibited signs of repentance, an
d of wishing to give up this clerical diet. Incontrovertible facts prove this as
sertion. He has eaten five or six children, a relatively insignificant number, n
o doubt, but remarkable enough from another point of view. It is manifest that, 
pricked by remorse-for my client is religious, in his way, and has a conscience,
 as I shall prove later-and desiring to extenuate his sin as far as possible, he
 has tried six times at least to substitute lay nourishment for clerical. That t
his was merely an experiment we can hardly doubt: for if it had been only a ques
tion of gastronomic variety, six would have been too few; why only six? Why not 
thirty? But if we regard it as an experiment, inspired by the fear of committing
 new sacrilege, then this number six becomes intelligible. Six attempts to calm 
his remorse, and the pricking of his conscience, would amply suffice, for these 
attempts could scarcely have been happy ones. In my humble opinion, a child is t
oo small; I should say, not sufficient; which would result in four or five times
 more lay children than monks being required in a given time. The sin, lessened 
on the one hand, would therefore be increased on the other, in quantity, not in 
quality. Please understand, gentlemen, that in reasoning thus, I am taking the p
oint of view which might have been taken by a criminal of the middle ages. As fo
r myself, a man of the late nineteenth century, I, of course, should reason diff
erently; I say so plainly, and therefore you need not jeer at me nor mock me, ge
ntlemen. As for you, general, it is still more unbecoming on your part. In the s
econd place, and giving my own personal opinion, a child's flesh is not a satisf
ying diet; it is too insipid, too sweet; and the criminal, in making these exper
iments, could have satisfied neither his conscience nor his appetite. I am about
 to conclude, gentlemen; and my conclusion contains a reply to one of the most i
mportant questions of that day and of our own! This criminal ended at last by de
nouncing himself to the clergy, and giving himself up to justice. We cannot but 
ask, remembering the penal system of that day, and the tortures that awaited him
-the wheel, the stake, the fire!-we cannot but ask, I repeat, what induced him t
o accuse himself of this crime? Why did he not simply stop short at the number s
ixty, and keep his secret until his last breath? Why could he not simply leave t
he monks alone, and go into the desert to repent?
   Or why not become a monk himself? That is where the puzzle comes in! There mu
st have been something stronger than the stake or the fire, or even than the hab
its of twenty years! There must have been an idea more powerful than all the cal
amities and sorrows of this world, famine or torture, leprosy or plague-an idea 
which entered into the heart, directed and enlarged the springs of life, and mad
e even that hell supportable to humanity! Show me a force, a power like that, in
 this our century of vices and railways! I might say, perhaps, in our century of
 steamboats and railways, but I repeat in our century of vices and railways, bec
ause I am drunk but truthful! Show me a single idea which unites men nowadays wi
th half the strength that it had in those centuries, and dare to maintain that t
he 'springs of life' have not been polluted and weakened beneath this 'star,' be
neath this network in which men are entangled! Don't talk to me about your prosp
erity, your riches, the rarity of famine, the rapidity of the means of transport
! There is more of riches, but less of force. The idea uniting heart and soul to
 heart and soul exists no more. All is loose, soft, limp-we are all of us limp
   Enough, gentlemen! I have done. That is not the question. No, the question is
 now, excellency, I believe, to sit down to the banquet you are about to provide
 for us!"
   Lebedeff had roused great indignation in some of his auditors (it should be r
emarked that the bottles were constantly uncorked during his speech); but this u
nexpected conclusion calmed even the most turbulent spirits. "That's how a cleve
r barrister makes a good point!" said he, when speaking of his peroration later 
on.
   The visitors began to laugh and chatter once again; the committee left their 
seats, and stretched their legs on the terrace. Keller alone was still disgusted
 with Lebedeff and his speech; he turned from one to another, saying in a loud v
oice:
   "He attacks education, he boasts of the fanaticism of the twelfth century, he
 makes absurd grimaces, and added to that he is by no means the innocent he make
s himself out to be. How did he get the money to buy this house, allow me to ask
?"
   In another corner was the general, holding forth to a group of hearers, among
 them Ptitsin, whom he had buttonholed. "I have known," said he, "a real interpr
eter of the Apocalypse, the late Gregory Semeonovitch Burmistroff, and he-he pie
rced the heart like a fiery flash! He began by putting on his spectacles, then h
e opened a large black book; his white beard, and his two medals on his breast, 
recalling acts of charity, all added to his impressiveness. He began in a stern 
voice, and before him generals, hard men of the world, bowed down, and ladies fe
ll to the ground fainting. But this one here-he ends by announcing a banquet! Th
at is not the real thing!"
   Ptitsin listened and smiled, then turned as if to get his hat; but if he had 
intended to leave, he changed his mind. Before the others had risen from the tab
le, Gania had suddenly left off drinking, and pushed away his glass, a dark shad
ow seemed to come over his face. When they all rose, he went and sat down by Rog
ojin. It might have been believed that quite friendly relations existed between 
them. Rogojin, who had also seemed on the point of going away now sat motionless
, his head bent, seeming to have forgotten his intention. He had drunk no wine, 
and appeared absorbed in reflection. From time to time he raised his eyes, and e
xamined everyone present; one might have imagined that he was expecting somethin
g very important to himself, and that he had decided to wait for it. The prince 
had taken two or three glasses of champagne, and seemed cheerful. As he rose he 
noticed Evgenie Pavlovitch, and, remembering the appointment he had made with hi
m, smiled pleasantly. Evgenie Pavlovitch made a sign with his head towards Hippo
lyte, whom he was attentively watching. The invalid was fast asleep, stretched o
ut on the sofa.
   "Tell me, prince, why on earth did this boy intrude himself upon you?" he ask
ed, with such annoyance and irritation in his voice that the prince was quite su
rprised. "I wouldn't mind laying odds that he is up to some mischief."
   "I have observed," said the prince, "that he seems to be an object of very si
ngular interest to you, Evgenie Pavlovitch. Why is it?"
   "You may add that I have surely enough to think of, on my own account, withou
t him; and therefore it is all the more surprising that I cannot tear my eyes an
d thoughts away from his detestable physiognomy."
   "Oh, come! He has a handsome face."
   "Why, look at him-look at him now!"
   The prince glanced again at Evgenie Pavlovitch with considerable surprise.
      V.
   HIPPOLYTE, who had fallen asleep during Lebedeff's discourse, now suddenly wo
ke up, just as though someone had jogged him in the side. He shuddered, raised h
imself on his arm, gazed around, and grew very pale. A look almost of terror cro
ssed his face as he recollected.
   "What! are they all off? Is it all over? Is the sun up?" He trembled, and cau
ght at the prince's hand. "What time is it? Tell me, quick, for goodness' sake! 
How long have I slept?" he added, almost in despair, just as though he had overs
lept something upon which his whole fate depended.
   "You have slept seven or perhaps eight minutes," said Evgenie Pavlovitch.
   Hippolyte gazed eagerly at the latter, and mused for a few moments.
   "Oh, is that all?" he said at last. "Then I-"
   He drew a long, deep breath of relief, as it seemed. He realized that all was
 not over as yet, that the sun had not risen, and that the guests had merely gon
e to supper. He smiled, and two hectic spots appeared on his cheeks.
   "So you counted the minutes while I slept, did you, Evgenie Pavlovitch?" he s
aid, ironically. "You have not taken your eyes off me all the evening-I have not
iced that much, you see! Ah, Rogojin! I've just been dreaming about him, prince,
" he added, frowning. "Yes, by the by," starting up, "where's the orator?
   Where's Lebedeff? Has he finished? What did he talk about? Is it true, prince
, that you once declared that 'beauty would save the world'? Great Heaven! The p
rince says that beauty saves the world! And I declare that he only has such play
ful ideas because he's in love! Gentlemen, the prince is in love. I guessed it t
he moment he came in. Don't blush, prince; you make me sorry for you. What beaut
y saves the world? Colia told me that you are a zealous Christian; is it so? Col
ia says you call yourself a Christian."
   The prince regarded him attentively, but said nothing.
   "You don't answer me; perhaps you think I am very fond of you?" added Hippoly
te, as though the words had been drawn from him.
   "No, I don't think that. I know you don't love me."
   "What, after yesterday? Wasn't I honest with you?"
   "I knew yesterday that you didn't love me."
   "Why so? why so? Because I envy you, eh? You always think that, I know. But d
o you know why I am saying all this? Look here! I must have some more champagne-
pour me out some, Keller, will you?"
   "No, you're not to drink any more, Hippolyte. I won't let you."
   The prince moved the glass away.
   "Well perhaps you're right," said Hippolyte, musing. They might say-yet, devi
l take them! what does it matter?-prince, what can it matter what people will sa
y of us THEN, eh? I believe I'm half asleep. I've had such a dreadful dream-I've
 only just remembered it. Prince, I don't wish you such dreams as that, though s
ure enough, perhaps, I DON'T love you. Why wish a man evil, though you do not lo
ve him, eh? Give me your hand-let me press it sincerely. There-you've given me y
our hand-you must feel that I DO press it sincerely, don't you? I don't think I 
shall drink any more. What time is it? Never mind, I know the time. The time has
 come, at all events. What! they are laying supper over there, are they? Then th
is table is free? Capital, gentlemen! I-hem! these gentlemen are not listening. 
Prince, I will just read over an article I have here. Supper is more interesting
, of course, but-"
   Here Hippolyte suddenly, and most unexpectedly, pulled out of his breast-pock
et a large sealed paper. This imposing-looking document he placed upon the table
 before him.
   The effect of this sudden action upon the company was instantaneous. Evgenie 
Pavlovitch almost bounded off his chair in excitement. Rogojin drew nearer to th
e table with a look on his face as if he knew what was coming. Gania came nearer
 too; so did Lebedeff and the others-the paper seemed to be an object of great i
nterest to the company in general.
   "What have you got there?" asked the prince, with some anxiety.
   "At the first glimpse of the rising sun, prince, I will go to bed. I told you
 I would, word of honour! You shall see!" cried Hippolyte. "You think I'm not ca
pable of opening this packet, do you?" He glared defiantly round at the audience
 in general.
   The prince observed that he was trembling all over.
   "None of us ever thought such a thing!" Muishkin replied for all.
   "Why should you suppose it of us? And what are you going to read, Hippolyte? 
What is it?"
   "Yes, what is it?" asked others. The packet sealed with red wax seemed to att
ract everyone, as though it were a magnet.
   "I wrote this yesterday, myself, just after I saw you, prince, and told you I
 would come down here. I wrote all day and all night, and finished it this morni
ng early. Afterwards I had a dream."
   "Hadn't we better hear it tomorrow?" asked the prince timidly.
   "Tomorrow 'there will be no more time!'" laughed Hippolyte, hysterically. "Yo
u needn't be afraid; I shall get through the whole thing in forty minutes, at mo
st an hour! Look how interested everybody is! Everybody has drawn near. Look! lo
ok at them all staring at my sealed packet! If I hadn't sealed it up it wouldn't
 have been half so effective! Ha, ha! that's mystery, that is! Now then, gentlem
en, shall I break the seal or not? Say the word; it's a mystery, I tell you-a se
cret! Prince, you know who said there would be 'no more time'? It was the great 
and powerful angel in the Apocalypse."
   "Better not read it now," said the prince, putting his hand on the packet.
   "No, don't read it!" cried Evgenie suddenly. He appeared so strangely disturb
ed that many of those present could not help wondering.
   "Reading? None of your reading now!" said somebody; "it's suppertime." "What 
sort of an article is it? For a paper? Probably it's very dull," said another. B
ut the prince's timid gesture had impressed even Hippolyte.
   "Then I'm not to read it?" he whispered, nervously. "Am I not to read it?" he
 repeated, gazing around at each face in turn. "What are you afraid of, prince?"
 he turned and asked the latter suddenly.
   "What should I be afraid of?"
   "Has anyone a coin about them? Give me a twenty-copeck piece, somebody!" And 
Hippolyte leapt from his chair.
   "Here you are," said Lebedeff, handing him one; he thought the boy had gone m
ad.
   "Vera Lukianovna," said Hippolyte, "toss it, will you? Heads, I read, tails, 
I don't."
   Vera Lebedeff tossed the coin into the air and let it fall on the table.
   It was "heads."
   "Then I read it," said Hippolyte, in the tone of one bowing to the fiat of de
stiny. He could not have grown paler if a verdict of death had suddenly been pre
sented to him.
   "But after all, what is it? Is it possible that I should have just risked my 
fate by tossing up?" he went on, shuddering; and looked round him again. His eye
s had a curious expression of sincerity. "That is an astonishing psychological f
act," he cried, suddenly addressing the prince, in a tone of the most intense su
rprise. "It is it is something quite inconceivable, prince," he repeated with gro
wing animation, like a man regaining consciousness. "Take note of it, prince, re
member it; you collect, I am told, facts concerning capital punishment They told 
me so. Ha, ha! My God, how absurd!" He sat down on the sofa, put his elbows on t
he table, and laid his head on his hands. "It is shameful-though what does it ma
tter to me if it is shameful?
   "Gentlemen, gentlemen! I am about to break the seal," he continued, with dete
rmination. "I-I-of course I don't insist upon anyone listening if they do not wi
sh to."
   With trembling fingers he broke the seal and drew out several sheets of paper
, smoothed them out before him, and began sorting them.
   "What on earth does all this mean? What's he going to read?" muttered several
 voices. Others said nothing; but one and all sat down and watched with curiosit
y. They began to think something strange might really be about to happen. Vera s
tood and trembled behind her father's chair, almost in tears with fright; Colia 
was nearly as much alarmed as she was. Lebedeff jumped up and put a couple of ca
ndles nearer to Hippolyte, so that he might see better.
   "Gentlemen, this-you'll soon see what this is," began Hippolyte, and suddenly
 commenced his reading.
   "It's headed, 'A Necessary Explanation,' with the motto, 'Apres moi le deluge
!' Oh, deuce take it all! Surely I can never have seriously written such a silly
 motto as that? Look here, gentlemen, I beg to give notice that all this is very
 likely terrible nonsense. It is only a few ideas of mine. If you think that the
re is anything mysterious coming-or in a word-"
   "Better read on without any more beating about the bush," said Gania.
   "Affectation!" remarked someone else.
   "Too much talk," said Rogojin, breaking the silence for the first time.
   Hippolyte glanced at him suddenly, and when their eye, met Rogojin showed his
 teeth in a disagreeable smile, and said the following strange words: "That's no
t the way to settle this business, my friend; that's not the way at all."
   Of course nobody knew what Rogojin meant by this; but his words made a deep i
mpression upon all. Everyone seemed to see in a flash the same idea.
   As for Hippolyte, their effect upon him was astounding. He trembled so that t
he prince was obliged to support him, and would certainly have cried out, but th
at his voice seemed to have entirely left him for the moment. For a minute or tw
o he could not speak at all, but panted and stared at Rogojin. At last he manage
d to ejaculate:
   "Then it was YOU who came-YOU-YOU?"
   "Came where? What do you mean?" asked Rogojin, amazed. But Hippolyte, panting
 and choking with excitement, interrupted him violently.
   "YOU came to me last week, in the night, at two o'clock, the day I was with y
ou in the morning! Confess it was you!"
   "Last week? In the night? Have you gone cracked, my good friend?"
   Hippolyte paused and considered a moment. Then a smile of cunning-almost triu
mph-crossed his lips.
   "It was you," he murmured, almost in a whisper, but with absolute conviction.
 "Yes, it was you who came to my room and sat silently on a chair at my window f
or a whole hour-more! It was between one and two at night; you rose and went out
 at about three. It was you, you! Why you should have frightened me so, why you 
should have wished to torment me like that, I cannot tell-but you it was."
   There was absolute hatred in his eyes as he said this, but his look of fear a
nd his trembling had not left him.
   "You shall hear all this directly, gentlemen. I-I-listen!"
   He seized his paper in a desperate hurry; he fidgeted with it, and tried to s
ort it, but for a long while his trembling hands could not collect the sheets to
gether. "He's either mad or delirious," murmured Rogojin. At last he began.
   For the first five minutes the reader's voice continued to tremble, and he re
ad disconnectedly and unevenly; but gradually his voice strengthened. Occasional
ly a violent fit of coughing stopped him, but his animation grew with the progre
ss of the reading-as did also the disagreeable impression which it made upon his
 audience,-until it reached the highest pitch of excitement.
   Here is the article.
      MY NECESSARY EXPLANATION.
   "Apres moi le deluge.
   "Yesterday morning the prince came to see me. Among other things he asked me 
to come down to his villa. I knew he would come and persuade me to this step, an
d that he would adduce the argument that it would be easier for me to die' among
 people and green trees,'-as he expressed it. But today he did not say 'die,' he
 said 'live.' It is pretty much the same to me, in my position, which he says. W
hen I asked him why he made such a point of his 'green trees,' he told me, to my
 astonishment, that he had heard that last time I was in Pavlofsk I had said tha
t I had come 'to have a last look at the trees.' "When I observed that it was al
l the same whether one died among trees or in front of a blank brick wall, as he
re, and that it was not worth making any fuss over a fortnight, he agreed at onc
e.
   But he insisted that the good air at Pavlofsk and the greenness would certain
ly cause a physical change for the better, and that my excitement, and my DREAMS
, would be perhaps relieved. I remarked to him, with a smile, that he spoke like
 a materialist, and he answered that he had always been one. As he never tells a
 lie, there must be something in his words. His smile is a pleasant one. I have 
had a good look at him. I don't know whether I like him or not; and I have no ti
me to waste over the question.
   The hatred which I felt for him for five months has become considerably modif
ied, I may say, during the last month. Who knows, perhaps I am going to Pavlofsk
 on purpose to see him! But why do I leave my chamber? Those who are sentenced t
o death should not leave their cells. If I had not formed a final resolve, but h
ad decided to wait until the last minute, I should not leave my room, or accept 
his invitation to come and die at Pavlofsk. I must be quick and finish this expl
anation before tomorrow. I shall have no time to read it over and correct it, fo
r I must read it tomorrow to the prince and two or three witnesses whom I shall 
probably find there.
   "As it will be absolutely true, without a touch of falsehood, I am curious to
 see what impression it will make upon me myself at the moment when I read it ou
t. This is my 'last and solemn'-but why need I call it that? There is no questio
n about the truth of it, for it is not worthwhile lying for a fortnight; a fortn
ight of life is not itself worth having, which is a proof that I write nothing h
ere but pure truth. ("N.B.-Let me remember to consider; am I mad at this moment,
 or not? or rather at these moments? I have been told that consumptives sometime
s do go out of their minds for a while in the last stages of the malady. I can p
rove this tomorrow when I read it out, by the impression it makes upon the audie
nce. I must settle this question once and for all, otherwise I can't go on with 
anything.) "I believe I have just written dreadful nonsense; but there's no time
 for correcting, as I said before. Besides that, I have made myself a promise no
t to alter a single word of what I write in this paper, even though I find that 
I am contradicting myself every five lines. I wish to verify the working of the 
natural logic of my ideas tomorrow during the reading-whether I am capable of de
tecting logical errors, and whether all that I have meditated over during the la
st six months be true, or nothing but delirium.
   "If two months since I had been called upon to leave my room and the view of 
Meyer's wall opposite, I verily believe I should have been sorry. But now I have
 no such feeling, and yet I am leaving this room and Meyer's brick wall FOR EVER
. So that my conclusion, that it is not worth while indulging in grief, or any o
ther emotion, for a fortnight, has proved stronger than my very nature, and has 
taken over the direction of my feelings. But is it so? Is it the case that my na
ture is conquered entirely? If I were to be put on the rack now, I should certai
nly cry out. I should not say that it is not worth while to yell and feel pain b
ecause I have but a fortnight to live.
   "But is it true that I have but a fortnight of life left to me? I know I told
 some of my friends that Doctor B. had informed me that this was the case; but I
 now confess that I lied; B. has not even seen me. However, a week ago, I called
 in a medical student, Kislorodoff, who is a Nationalist, an Atheist, and a Nihi
list, by conviction, and that is why I had him. I needed a man who would tell me
 the bare truth without any humbug or ceremony-and so he did-indeed, almost with
 pleasure (which I thought was going a little too far).
   "Well, he plumped out that I had about a month left me; it might be a little 
more, he said, under favourable circumstances, but it might also be considerably
 less. According to his opinion I might die quite suddenly-tomorrow, for instanc
e-there had been such cases. Only a day or two since a young lady at Colomna who
 suffered from consumption, and was about on a par with myself in the march of t
he disease, was going out to market to buy provisions, when she suddenly felt fa
int, lay down on the sofa, gasped once, and died.
   "Kislorodoff told me all this with a sort of exaggerated devilmay-care neglig
ence, and as though he did me great honour by talking to me so, because it showe
d that he considered me the same sort of exalted Nihilistic being as himself, to
 whom death was a matter of no consequence whatever, either way.
   "At all events, the fact remained-a month of life and no more!
   That he is right in his estimation I am absolutely persuaded.
   "It puzzles me much to think how on earth the prince guessed yesterday that I
 have had bad dreams. He said to me, 'Your excitement and dreams will find relie
f at Pavlofsk.' Why did he say 'dreams'? Either he is a doctor, or else he is a 
man of exceptional intelligence and wonderful powers of observation. (But that h
e is an 'idiot,' at bottom there can be no doubt whatever.) It so happened that 
just before he arrived I had a delightful little dream; one of a kind that I hav
e hundreds of just now. I had fallen asleep about an hour before he came in, and
 dreamed that I was in some room, not my own. It was a large room, well furnishe
d, with a cupboard, chest of drawers, sofa, and my bed, a fine wide bed covered 
with a silken counterpane.
   But I observed in the room a dreadful-looking creature, a sort of monster. It
 was a little like a scorpion, but was not a scorpion, but far more horrible, an
d especially so, because there are no creatures anything like it in nature, and 
because it had appeared to me for a purpose, and bore some mysterious significat
ion. I looked at the beast well; it was brown in colour and had a shell; it was 
a crawling kind of reptile, about eight inches long, and narrowed down from the 
head, which was about a couple of fingers in width, to the end of the tail, whic
h came to a fine point. Out of its trunk, about a couple of inches below its hea
d, came two legs at an angle of forty-five degrees, each about three inches long
, so that the beast looked like a trident from above. It had eight hard needle-l
ike whiskers coming out from different parts of its body; it went along like a s
nake, bending its body about in spite of the shell it wore, and its motion was v
ery quick and very horrible to look at. I was dreadfully afraid it would sting m
e; somebody had told me, I thought, that it was venomous; but what tormented me 
most of all was the wondering and wondering as to who had sent it into my room, 
and what was the mystery which I felt it contained.
   "It hid itself under the cupboard and under the chest of drawers, and crawled
 into the corners. I sat on a chair and kept my legs tucked under me. Then the b
east crawled quietly across the room and disappeared somewhere near my chair. I 
looked about for it in terror, but I still hoped that as my feet were safely tuc
ked away it would not be able to touch me.
   "Suddenly I heard behind me, and about on a level with my head, a sort of rat
tling sound. I turned sharp round and saw that the brute had crawled up the wall
 as high as the level of my face, and that its horrible tail, which was moving i
ncredibly fast from side to side, was actually touching my hair! I jumped up-and
 it disappeared. I did not dare lie down on my bed for fear it should creep unde
r my pillow. My mother came into the room, and some friends of hers. They began 
to hunt for the reptile and were more composed than I was; they did not seem to 
be afraid of it. But they did not understand as I did.
   "Suddenly the monster reappeared; it crawled slowly across the room and made 
for the door, as though with some fixed intention, and with a slow movement that
 was more horrible than ever.
   "Then my mother opened the door and called my dog, Norma. Norma was a great N
ewfoundland, and died five years ago.
   "She sprang forward and stood still in front of the reptile as if she had bee
n turned to stone. The beast stopped too, but its tail and claws still moved abo
ut. I believe animals are incapable of feeling supernatural fright-if I have bee
n rightly informed,-but at this moment there appeared to me to be something more
 than ordinary about Norma's terror, as though it must be supernatural; and as t
hough she felt, just as I did myself, that this reptile was connected with some 
mysterious secret, some fatal omen.
   "Norma backed slowly and carefully away from the brute, which followed her, c
reeping deliberately after her as though it intended to make a sudden dart and s
ting her.
   "In spite of Norma's terror she looked furious, though she trembled in all he
r limbs. At length she slowly bared her terrible teeth, opened her great red jaw
s, hesitated-took courage, and seized the beast in her mouth. It seemed to try t
o dart out of her jaws twice, but Norma caught at it and half swallowed it as it
 was escaping. The shell cracked in her teeth; and the tail and legs stuck out o
f her mouth and shook about in a horrible manner. Suddenly Norma gave a piteous 
whine; the reptile had bitten her tongue. She opened her mouth wide with the pai
n, and I saw the beast lying across her tongue, and out of its body, which was a
lmost bitten in two, came a hideous white-looking substance, oozing out into Nor
ma's mouth; it was of the consistency of a crushed black-beetle. just then I awo
ke and the prince entered the room."
   "Gentlemen!" said Hippolyte, breaking off here, "I have not done yet, but it 
seems to me that I have written down a great deal here that is unnecessary,-this
 dream-"
   "You have indeed!" said Gania.
   "There is too much about myself, I know, but-" As Hippolyte said this his fac
e wore a tired, pained look, and he wiped the sweat off his brow.
   "Yes," said Lebedeff, "you certainly think a great deal too much about yourse
lf."
   "Well-gentlemen-I do not force anyone to listen! If any of you are unwilling 
to sit it out, please go away, by all means!"
   "He turns people out of a house that isn't his own," muttered Rogojin.
   "Suppose we all go away?" said Ferdishenko suddenly.
   Hippolyte clutched his manuscript, and gazing at the last speaker with glitte
ring eyes, said: "You don't like me at all!" A few laughed at this, but not all.
   "Hippolyte," said the prince, "give me the papers, and go to bed like a sensi
ble fellow. We'll have a good talk tomorrow, but you really mustn't go on with t
his reading; it is not good for you!"
   "How can I? How can I?" cried Hippolyte, looking at him in amazement. "Gentle
men! I was a fool! I won't break off again.
   Listen, everyone who wants to!"
   He gulped down some water out of a glass standing near, bent over the table, 
in order to hide his face from the audience, and recommenced.
   "The idea that it is not worth while living for a few weeks took possession o
f me a month ago, when I was told that I had four weeks to live, but only partia
lly so at that time. The idea quite overmastered me three days since, that eveni
ng at Pavlofsk. The first time that I felt really impressed with this thought wa
s on the terrace at the prince's, at the very moment when I had taken it into my
 head to make a last trial of life. I wanted to see people and trees (I believe 
I said so myself), I got excited, I maintained Burdovsky's rights, 'my neighbour
!'-I dreamt that one and all would open their arms, and embrace me, that there w
ould be an indescribable exchange of forgiveness between us all! In a word, I be
haved like a fool, and then, at that very same instant, I felt my 'last convicti
on.' I ask myself now how I could have waited six months for that conviction! I 
knew that I had a disease that spares no one, and I really had no illusions; but
 the more I realized my condition, the more I clung to life; I wanted to live at
 any price. I confess I might well have resented that blind, deaf fate, which, w
ith no apparent reason, seemed to have decided to crush me like a fly; but why d
id I not stop at resentment? Why did I begin to live, knowing that it was not wo
rthwhile to begin? Why did I attempt to do what I knew to be an impossibility? A
nd yet I could not even read a book to the end; I had given up reading. What is 
the good of reading, what is the good of learning anything, for just six months?
 That thought has made me throw aside a book more than once.
   "Yes, that wall of Meyer's could tell a tale if it liked. There was no spot o
n its dirty surface that I did not know by heart.
   Accursed wall! and yet it is dearer to me than all the Pavlofsk trees!-That i
s-it WOULD be dearer if it were not all the same to me, now!
   "I remember now with what hungry interest I began to watch the lives of other
 people-interest that I had never felt before! I used to wait for Colia's arriva
l impatiently, for I was so ill myself, then, that I could not leave the house. 
I so threw myself into every little detail of news, and took so much interest in
 every report and rumour, that I believe I became a regular gossip! I could not 
understand, among other things, how all these people-with so much life in and be
fore them-do not become RICH-and I don't understand it now. I remember being tol
d of a poor wretch I once knew, who had died of hunger. I was almost beside myse
lf with rage! I believe if I could have resuscitated him I would have done so fo
r the sole purpose of murdering him!
   "Occasionally I was so much better that I could go out; but the streets used 
to put me in such a rage that I would lock myself up for days rather than go out
, even if I were well enough to do so!
   I could not bear to see all those preoccupied, anxious-looking creatures cont
inuously surging along the streets past me! Why are they always anxious? What is
 the meaning of their eternal care and worry? It is their wickedness, their perp
etual detestable malice-that's what it is-they are all full of malice, malice!
   "Whose fault is it that they are all miserable, that they don't know how to l
ive, though they have fifty or sixty years of life before them? Why did that foo
l allow himself to die of hunger with sixty years of unlived life before him?
   "And everyone of them shows his rags, his toil-worn hands, and yells in his w
rath: 'Here are we, working like cattle all our lives, and always as hungry as d
ogs, and there are others who do not work, and are fat and rich!' The eternal re
frain! And side by side with them trots along some wretched fellow who has known
 better days, doing light porter's work from morn to night for a living, always 
blubbering and saying that 'his wife died because he had no money to buy medicin
e with,' and his children dying of cold and hunger, and his eldest daughter gone
 to the bad, and so on. Oh! I have no pity and no patience for these fools of pe
ople.
   Why can't they be Rothschilds? Whose fault is it that a man has not got milli
ons of money like Rothschild? If he has life, all this must be in his power! Who
se fault is it that he does not know how to live his life?
   "Oh! it's all the same to me now-NOW! But at that time I would soak my pillow
 at night with tears of mortification, and tear at my blanket in my rage and fur
y. Oh, how I longed at that time to be turned out-ME, eighteen years old, poor, 
half-clothed, turned out into the street, quite alone, without lodging, without 
work, without a crust of bread, without relations, without a single acquaintance
, in some large town-hungry, beaten (if you like), but in good health-and THEN I
 would show them-"What would I show them?
   "Oh, don't think that I have no sense of my own humiliation! I have suffered 
already in reading so far. Which of you all does not think me a fool at this mom
ent-a young fool who knows nothing of life-forgetting that to live as I have liv
ed these last six months is to live longer than grey-haired old men. Well, let t
hem laugh, and say it is all nonsense, if they please. They may say it is all fa
iry-tales, if they like; and I have spent whole nights telling myself fairy-tale
s. I remember them all. But how can I tell fairy-tales now? The time for them is
 over. They amused me when I found that there was not even time for me to learn 
the Greek grammar, as I wanted to do. 'I shall die before I get to the syntax,' 
I thought at the first page-and threw the book under the table. It is there stil
l, for I forbade anyone to pick it up.
   "If this 'Explanation' gets into anybody's hands, and they have patience to r
ead it through, they may consider me a madman, or a schoolboy, or, more likely, 
a man condemned to die, who thought it only natural to conclude that all men, ex
cepting himself, esteem life far too lightly, live it far too carelessly and laz
ily, and are, therefore, one and all, unworthy of it. Well, I affirm that my rea
der is wrong again, for my convictions have nothing to do with my sentence of de
ath. Ask them, ask any one of them, or all of them, what they mean by happiness!
 Oh, you may be perfectly sure that if Columbus was happy, it was not after he h
ad discovered America, but when he was discovering it! You may be quite sure tha
t he reached the culminating point of his happiness three days before he saw the
 New World with his actual eves, when his mutinous sailors wanted to tack about,
 and return to Europe! What did the New World matter after all? Columbus had har
dly seen it when he died, and in reality he was entirely ignorant of what he had
 discovered. The important thing is life-life and nothing else! What is any 'dis
covery' whatever compared with the incessant, eternal discovery of life?
   "But what is the use of talking? I'm afraid all this is so commonplace that m
y confession will be taken for a schoolboy exercise-the work of some ambitious l
ad writing in the hope of his work 'seeing the light'; or perhaps my readers wil
l say that 'I had perhaps something to say, but did not know how to express it.'
 "Let me add to this that in every idea emanating from genius, or even in every 
serious human idea-born in the human brain-there always remains something-some s
ediment-which cannot be expressed to others, though one wrote volumes and lectur
ed upon it for five-and-thirty years. There is always a something, a remnant, wh
ich will never come out from your brain, but will remain there with you, and you
 alone, for ever and ever, and you will die, perhaps, without having imparted wh
at may be the very essence of your idea to a single living soul.
   "So that if I cannot now impart all that has tormented me for the last six mo
nths, at all events you will understand that, having reached my 'last conviction
s,' I must have paid a very dear price for them. That is what I wished, for reas
ons of my own, to make a point of in this my 'Explanation.' "But let me resume.
      VI.
   "I WILL not deceive you. 'Reality' got me so entrapped in its meshes now and 
again during the past six months, that I forgot my 'sentence' (or perhaps I did 
not wish to think of it), and actually busied myself with affairs.
   "A word as to my circumstances. When, eight months since, I became very ill, 
I threw up all my old connections and dropped all my old companions. As I was al
ways a gloomy, morose sort of individual, my friends easily forgot me; of course
, they would have forgotten me all the same, without that excuse. My position at
 home was solitary enough. Five months ago I separated myself entirely from the 
family, and no one dared enter my room except at stated times, to clean and tidy
 it, and so on, and to bring me my meals. My mother dared not disobey me; she ke
pt the children quiet, for my sake, and beat them if they dared to make any nois
e and disturb me. I so often complained of them that I should think they must be
 very fond, indeed, of me by this time. I think I must have tormented 'my faithf
ul Colia' (as I called him) a good deal too. He tormented me of late; I could se
e that he always bore my tempers as though he had determined to 'spare the poor 
invalid.' This annoyed me, naturally. He seemed to have taken it into his head t
o imitate the prince in Christian meekness! Surikoff, who lived above us, annoye
d me, too. He was so miserably poor, and I used to prove to him that he had no o
ne to blame but himself for his poverty. I used to be so angry that I think I fr
ightened him eventually, for he stopped coming to see me. He was a most meek and
 humble fellow, was Surikoff. (N.B.-They say that meekness is a great power. I m
ust ask the prince about this, for the expression is his.) But I remember one da
y in March, when I went up to his lodgings to see whether it was true that one o
f his children had been starved and frozen to death, I began to hold forth to hi
m about his poverty being his own fault, and, in the course of my remarks, I acc
identally smiled at the corpse of his child. Well, the poor wretch's lips began 
to tremble, and he caught me by the shoulder, and pushed me to the door. 'Go out
,' he said, in a whisper. I went out, of course, and I declare I LIKED it. I lik
ed it at the very moment when I was turned out. But his words filled me with a s
trange sort of feeling of disdainful pity for him whenever I thought of them-a f
eeling which I did not in the least desire to entertain. At the very moment of t
he insult (for I admit that I did insult him, though I did not mean to), this ma
n could not lose his temper.
   His lips had trembled, but I swear it was not with rage. He had taken me by t
he arm, and said, 'Go out,' without the least anger.
   There was dignity, a great deal of dignity, about him, and it was so inconsis
tent with the look of him that, I assure you, it was quite comical. But there wa
s no anger. Perhaps he merely began to despise me at that moment.
   "Since that time he has always taken off his hat to me on the stairs, wheneve
r I met him, which is a thing he never did before; but he always gets away from 
me as quickly as he can, as though he felt confused. If he did despise me, he de
spised me 'meekly,' after his own fashion.
   "I dare say he only took his hat off out of fear, as it were, to the son of h
is creditor; for he always owed my mother money. I thought of having an explanat
ion with him, but I knew that if I did, he would begin to apologize in a minute 
or two, so I decided to let him alone.
   "Just about that time, that is, the middle of March, I suddenly felt very muc
h better; this continued for a couple of weeks. I used to go out at dusk. I like
 the dusk, especially in March, when the night frost begins to harden the day's 
puddles, and the gas is burning.
   "Well, one night in the Shestilavochnaya, a man passed me with a paper parcel
 under his arm. I did not take stock of him very carefully, but he seemed to be 
dressed in some shabby summer dust-coat, much too light for the season. When he 
was opposite the lamp-post, some ten yards away, I observed something fall out o
f his pocket. I hurried forward to pick it up, just in time, for an old wretch i
n a long kaftan rushed up too. He did not dispute the matter, but glanced at wha
t was in my hand and disappeared.
   "It was a large old-fashioned pocket-book, stuffed full; but I guessed, at a 
glance, that it had anything in the world inside it, except money.
   "The owner was now some forty yards ahead of me, and was very soon lost in th
e crowd. I ran after him, and began calling out; but as I knew nothing to say ex
cepting 'hey!' he did not turn round. Suddenly he turned into the gate of a hous
e to the left; and when I darted in after him, the gateway was so dark that I co
uld see nothing whatever. It was one of those large houses built in small teneme
nts, of which there must have been at least a hundred.
   "When I entered the yard I thought I saw a man going along on the far side of
 it; but it was so dark I could not make out his figure.
   "I crossed to that corner and found a dirty dark staircase. I heard a man mou
nting up above me, some way higher than I was, and thinking I should catch him b
efore his door would be opened to him, I rushed after him. I heard a door open a
nd shut on the fifth storey, as I panted along; the stairs were narrow, and the 
steps innumerable, but at last I reached the door I thought the right one. Some 
moments passed before I found the bell and got it to ring.
   "An old peasant woman opened the door; she was busy lighting the 'samovar' in
 a tiny kitchen. She listened silently to my questions, did not understand a wor
d, of course, and opened another door leading into a little bit of a room, low a
nd scarcely furnished at all, but with a large, wide bed in it, hung with curtai
ns. On this bed lay one Terentich, as the woman called him, drunk, it appeared t
o me. On the table was an end of candle in an iron candlestick, and a half-bottl
e of vodka, nearly finished. Terentich muttered something to me, and signed towa
rds the next room. The old woman had disappeared, so there was nothing for me to
 do but to open the door indicated. I did so, and entered the next room.
   "This was still smaller than the other, so cramped that I could scarcely turn
 round; a narrow single bed at one side took up nearly all the room. Besides the
 bed there were only three common chairs, and a wretched old kitchen-table stand
ing before a small sofa. One could hardly squeeze through between the table and 
the bed.
   "On the table, as in the other room, burned a tallow candle-end in an iron ca
ndlestick; and on the bed there whined a baby of scarcely three weeks old. A pal
e-looking woman was dressing the child, probably the mother; she looked as thoug
h she had not as yet got over the trouble of childbirth, she seemed so weak and 
was so carelessly dressed. Another child, a little girl of about three years old
, lay on the sofa, covered over with what looked like a man's old dress-coat.
   "At the table stood a man in his shirt sleeves; he had thrown off his coat; i
t lay upon the bed; and he was unfolding a blue paper parcel in which were a cou
ple of pounds of bread, and some little sausages.
   "On the table along with these things were a few old bits of black bread, and
 some tea in a pot. From under the bed there protruded an open portmanteau full 
of bundles of rags. In a word, the confusion and untidiness of the room were ind
escribable.
   "It appeared to me, at the first glance, that both the man and the woman were
 respectable people, but brought to that pitch of poverty where untidiness seems
 to get the better of every effort to cope with it, till at last they take a sor
t of bitter satisfaction in it. When I entered the room, the man, who had entere
d but a moment before me, and was still unpacking his parcels, was saying someth
ing to his wife in an excited manner.
   The news was apparently bad, as usual, for the woman began whimpering. The ma
n's face seemed tome to be refined and even pleasant. He was dark-complexioned, 
and about twenty-eight years of age; he wore black whiskers, and his lip and chi
n were shaved.
   He looked morose, but with a sort of pride of expression. A curious scene fol
lowed.
   "There are people who find satisfaction in their own touchy feelings, especia
lly when they have just taken the deepest offence; at such moments they feel tha
t they would rather be offended than not. These easily-ignited natures, if they 
are wise, are always full of remorse afterwards, when they reflect that they hav
e been ten times as angry as they need have been.
   "The gentleman before me gazed at me for some seconds in amazement, and his w
ife in terror; as though there was something alarmingly extraordinary in the fac
t that anyone could come to see them. But suddenly he fell upon me almost with f
ury; I had had no time to mutter more than a couple of words; but he had doubtle
ss observed that I was decently dressed and, therefore, took deep offence becaus
e I had dared enter his den so unceremoniously, and spy out the squalor and unti
diness of it.
   "Of course he was delighted to get hold of someone upon whom to vent his rage
 against things in general.
   "For a moment I thought he would assault me; he grew so pale that he looked l
ike a woman about to have hysterics; his wife was dreadfully alarmed.
   "'How dare you come in so? Be off!' he shouted, trembling all over with rage 
and scarcely able to articulate the words.
   Suddenly, however, he observed his pocketbook in my hand.
   "'I think you dropped this,' I remarked, as quietly and drily as I could. (I 
thought it best to treat him so.) For some while he stood before me in downright
 terror, and seemed unable to understand. He then suddenly grabbed at his side-p
ocket, opened his mouth in alarm, and beat his forehead with his hand.
   "'My God!' he cried, 'where did you find it? How?' I explained in as few word
s as I could, and as drily as possible, how I had seen it and picked it up; how 
I had run after him, and called out to him, and how I had followed him upstairs 
and groped my way to his door.
   "'Gracious Heaven!' he cried, 'all our papers are in it! My dear sir, you lit
tle know what you have done for us. I should have been lost-lost!' "I had taken 
hold of the door-handle meanwhile, intending to leave the room without reply; bu
t I was panting with my run upstairs, and my exhaustion came to a climax in a vi
olent fit of coughing, so bad that I could hardly stand.
   "I saw how the man dashed about the room to find me an empty chair, how he ki
cked the rags off a chair which was covered up by them, brought it to me, and he
lped me to sit down; but my cough went on for another three minutes or so. When 
I came to myself he was sitting by me on another chair, which he had also cleare
d of the rubbish by throwing it all over the floor, and was watching me intently
.
   "'I'm afraid you are ill?' he remarked, in the tone which doctors use when th
ey address a patient. 'I am myself a medical man' (he did not say 'doctor'), wit
h which words he waved his hands towards the room and its contents as though in 
protest at his present condition. 'I see that you-' "'I'm in consumption,' I sai
d laconically, rising from my seat.
   He jumped up, too.
   "'Perhaps you are exaggerating-if you were to take proper measures perhaps-"
   "He was terribly confused and did not seem able to collect his scattered sens
es; the pocket-book was still in his left hand.
   "'Oh, don't mind me,' I said. 'Dr. B- saw me last week' (I lugged him in agai
n), 'and my hash is quite settled; pardon me-'
   I took hold of the door-handle again. I was on the point of opening the door 
and leaving my grateful but confused medical friend to himself and his shame, wh
en my damnable cough got hold of me again.
   "My doctor insisted on my sitting down again to get my breath. He now said so
mething to his wife who, without leaving her place, addressed a few words of gra
titude and courtesy to me. She seemed very shy over it, and her sickly face flus
hed up with confusion.
   I remained, but with the air of a man who knows he is intruding and is anxiou
s to get away. The doctor's remorse at last seemed to need a vent, I could see.
   "'If I-' he began, breaking off abruptly every other moment, and starting ano
ther sentence. 'I-I am so very grateful to you, and I am so much to blame in you
r eyes, I feel sure, I-you see-' (he pointed to the room again) 'at this moment 
I am in such a position-' "'Oh!' I said, 'there's nothing to see; it's quite a c
lear case-you've lost your post and have come up to make explanations and get an
other, if you can!' "'How do you know that?' he asked in amazement.
   "'Oh, it was evident at the first glance,' I said ironically, but not intenti
onally so. 'There are lots of people who come up from the provinces full of hope
, and run about town, and have to live as best they can.' "He began to talk at o
nce excitedly and with trembling lips; he began complaining and telling me his s
tory. He interested me, I confess; I sat there nearly an hour. His story was a v
ery ordinary one. He had been a provincial doctor; he had a civil appointment, a
nd had no sooner taken it up than intrigues began.
   Even his wife was dragged into these. He was proud, and flew into a passion; 
there was a change of local government which acted in favour of his opponents; h
is position was undermined, complaints were made against him; he lost his post a
nd came up to Petersburg with his last remaining money, in order to appeal to hi
gher authorities. Of course nobody would listen to him for a long time; he would
 come and tell his story one day and be refused promptly; another day he would b
e fed on false promises; again he would be treated harshly; then he would be tol
d to sign some documents; then he would sign the paper and hand it in, and they 
would refuse to receive it, and tell him to file a formal petition. In a word he
 had been driven about from office to office for five months and had spent every
 farthing he had; his wife's last rags had just been pawned; and meanwhile a chi
ld had been born to them and-and today I have a final refusal to my petition, an
d I have hardly a crumb of bread left-I have nothing left; my wife has had a bab
y lately-and I-I-' "He sprang up from his chair and turned away. His wife was cr
ying in the corner; the child had begun to moan again. I pulled out my note-book
 and began writing in it. When I had finished and rose from my chair he was stan
ding before me with an expression of alarmed curiosity.
   "'I have jotted down your name,' I told him, 'and all the rest of it-the plac
e you served at, the district, the date, and all. I have a friend, Bachmatoff, w
hose uncle is a councillor of state and has to do with these matters, one Peter 
Matveyevitch Bachmatoff.' "'Peter Matveyevitch Bachmatoff!' he cried, trembling 
all over with excitement. 'Why, nearly everything depends on that very man!' "It
 is very curious, this story of the medical man, and my visit, and the happy ter
mination to which I contributed by accident!
   Everything fitted in, as in a novel. I told the poor people not to put much h
ope in me, because I was but a poor schoolboy myself-(I am not really, but I hum
iliated myself as much as possible in order to make them less hopeful)-but that 
I would go at once to the Vassili Ostroff and see my friend; and that as I knew 
for certain that his uncle adored him, and was absolutely devoted to him as the 
last hope and branch of the family, perhaps the old man might do something to ob
lige his nephew.
   "'If only they would allow me to explain all to his excellency!
   If I could but be permitted to tell my tale to him!" he cried, trembling with
 feverish agitation, and his eyes flashing with excitement. I repeated once more
 that I could not hold out much hope-that it would probably end in smoke, and if
 I did not turn up next morning they must make up their minds that there was no 
more to be done in the matter.
   "They showed me out with bows and every kind of respect; they seemed quite be
side themselves. I shall never forget the expression of their faces!
   "I took a droshky and drove over to the Vassili Ostroff at once.
   For some years I had been at enmity with this young Bachmatoff, at school. We
 considered him an aristocrat; at all events I called him one. He used to dress 
smartly, and always drove to school in a private trap. He was a good companion, 
and was always merry and jolly, sometimes even witty, though he was not very int
ellectual, in spite of the fact that he was always top of the class; I myself wa
s never top in anything! All his companions were very fond of him, excepting mys
elf. He had several times during those years come up to me and tried to make fri
ends; but I had always turned sulkily away and refused to have anything to do wi
th him. I had not seen him for a whole year now; he was at the university. When,
 at nine o'clock, or so, this evening, I arrived and was shown up to him with gr
eat ceremony, he first received me with astonishment, and not too affably, but h
e soon cheered up, and suddenly gazed intently at me and burst out laughing.
   "'Why, what on earth can have possessed you to come and see ME, Terentieff?' 
he cried, with his usual pleasant, sometimes audacious, but never offensive fami
liarity, which I liked in reality, but for which I also detested him. 'Why what'
s the matter?' he cried in alarm. 'Are you ill?' "That confounded cough of mine 
had come on again; I fell into a chair, and with difficulty recovered my breath.
 'It's all right, it's only consumption' I said. 'I have come to you with a peti
tion!' "He sat down in amazement, and I lost no time in telling him the medical 
man's history; and explained that he, with the influence which he possessed over
 his uncle, might do some good to the poor fellow.
   "'I'll do it-I'll do it, of course!' he said. 'I shall attack my uncle about 
it tomorrow morning, and I'm very glad you told me the story. But how was it tha
t you thought of coming to me about it, Terentieff?' "'So much depends upon your
 uncle,' I said. 'And besides we have always been enemies, Bachmatoff; and as yo
u are a generous sort of fellow, I thought you would not refuse my request becau
se I was your enemy!' I added with irony.
   "'Like Napoleon going to England, eh?' cried he, laughing. 'I'll do it though
-of course, and at once, if I can!' he added, seeing that I rose seriously from 
my chair at this point.
   "And sure enough the matter ended as satisfactorily as possible.
   A month or so later my medical friend was appointed to another post. He got h
is travelling expenses paid, and something to help him to start life with once m
ore. I think Bachmatoff must have persuaded the doctor to accept a loan from him
self. I saw Bachmatoff two or three times, about this period, the third time bei
ng when he gave a farewell dinner to the doctor and his wife before their depart
ure, a champagne dinner.
   "Bachmatoff saw me home after the dinner and we crossed the Nicolai bridge. W
e were both a little drunk. He told me of his joy, the joyful feeling of having 
done a good action; he said that it was all thanks to myself that he could feel 
this satisfaction; and held forth about the foolishness of the theory that indiv
idual charity is useless "I, too, was burning to have my say!
   "'In Moscow,' I said, 'there was an old state counsellor, a civil general, wh
o, all his life, had been in the habit of visiting the prisons and speaking to c
riminals. Every party of convicts on its way to Siberia knew beforehand that on 
the Vorobeef Hills the "old general" would pay them a visit. He did all he under
took seriously and devotedly. He would walk down the rows of the unfortunate pri
soners, stop before each individual and ask after his needs-he never sermonized 
them; he spoke kindly to them-he gave them money; he brought them all sorts of n
ecessaries for the journey, and gave them devotional books, choosing those who c
ould read, under the firm conviction that they would read to those who could not
, as they went along.
   "'He scarcely ever talked about the particular crimes of any of them, but lis
tened if any volunteered information on that point.
   All the convicts were equal for him, and he made no distinction.
   He spoke to all as to brothers, and every one of them looked upon him as a fa
ther. When he observed among the exiles some poor woman with a child, he would a
lways come forward and fondle the little one, and make it laugh. He continued th
ese acts of mercy up to his very death; and by that time all the criminals, all 
over Russia and Siberia, knew him!
   "'A man I knew who had been to Siberia and returned, told me that he himself 
had been a witness of how the very most hardened criminals remembered the old ge
neral, though, in point of fact, he could never, of course, have distributed mor
e than a few pence to each member of a party. Their recollection of him was not 
sentimental or particularly devoted. Some wretch, for instance, who had been a m
urderer-cutting the throat of a dozen fellowcreatures, for instance; or stabbing
 six little children for his own amusement (there have been such men!)-would per
haps, without rhyme or reason, suddenly give a sigh and say, "I wonder whether t
hat old general is alive still!" Although perhaps he had not thought of mentioni
ng him for a dozen years before! How can one say what seed of good may have been
 dropped into his soul, never to die?' "I continued in that strain for a long wh
ile, pointing out to Bachmatoff how impossible it is to follow up the effects of
 any isolated good deed one may do, in all its influences and subtle workings up
on the heart and after-actions of others.
   "'And to think that you are to be cut off from life!' remarked Bachmatoff, in
 a tone of reproach, as though he would like to find someone to pitch into on my
 account.
   "We were leaning over the balustrade of the bridge, looking into the Neva at 
this moment.
   "'Do you know what has suddenly come into my head?' said I, suddenly-leaning 
further and further over the rail.
   "'Surely not to throw yourself into the river?' cried Bachmatoff in alarm. Pe
rhaps he read my thought in my face.
   "'No, not yet. At present nothing but the following consideration. You see I 
have some two or three months left me to live-perhaps four; well, supposing that
 when I have but a month or two more, I take a fancy for some "good deed" that n
eeds both trouble and time, like this business of our doctor friend, for instanc
e: why, I shall have to give up the idea of it and take to something else-some L
ITTLE good deed, MORE WITHIN MY MEANS, eh?
   Isn't that an amusing idea!' "Poor Bachmatoff was much impressed-painfully so
. He took me all the way home; not attempting to console me, but behaving with t
he greatest delicacy. On taking leave he pressed my hand warmly and asked permis
sion to come and see me. I replied that if he came to me as a 'comforter,' so to
 speak (for he would be in that capacity whether he spoke to me in a soothing ma
nner or only kept silence, as I pointed out to him), he would but remind me each
 time of my approaching death! He shrugged his shoulders, but quite agreed with 
me; and we parted better friends than I had expected.
   "But that evening and that night were sown the first seeds of my 'last convic
tion.' I seized greedily on my new idea; I thirstily drank in all its different 
aspects (I did not sleep a wink that night!), and the deeper I went into it the 
more my being seemed to merge itself in it, and the more alarmed I became. A dre
adful terror came over me at last, and did not leave me all next day.
   "Sometimes, thinking over this, I became quite numb with the terror of it; an
d I might well have deduced from this fact, that my 'last conviction' was eating
 into my being too fast and too seriously, and would undoubtedly come to its cli
max before long.
   And for the climax I needed greater determination than I yet possessed.
   "However, within three weeks my determination was taken, owing to a very stra
nge circumstance.
   "Here on my paper, I make a note of all the figures and dates that come into 
my explanation. Of course, it is all the same to me, but just now-and perhaps on
ly at this moment-I desire that all those who are to judge of my action should s
ee clearly out of how logical a sequence of deductions has at length proceeded m
y 'last conviction.' "I have said above that the determination needed by me for 
the accomplishment of my final resolve, came to hand not through any sequence of
 causes, but thanks to a certain strange circumstance which had perhaps no conne
ction whatever with the matter at issue. Ten days ago Rogojin called upon me abo
ut certain business of his own with which I have nothing to do at present. I had
 never seen Rogojin before, but had often heard about him.
   "I gave him all the information he needed, and he very soon took his departur
e; so that, since he only came for the purpose of gaining the information, the m
atter might have been expected to end there.
   "But he interested me too much, and all that day I was under the influence of
 strange thoughts connected with him, and I determined to return his visit the n
ext day.
   "Rogojin was evidently by no means pleased to see me, and hinted, delicately,
 that he saw no reason why our acquaintance should continue. For all that, howev
er, I spent a very interesting hour, and so, I dare say, did he. There was so gr
eat a contrast between us that I am sure we must both have felt it; anyhow, I fe
lt it acutely. Here was I, with my days numbered, and he, a man in the full vigo
ur of life, living in the present, without the slightest thought for 'final conv
ictions,' or numbers, or days, or, in fact, for anything but that which-which-we
ll, which he was mad about, if he will excuse me the expression-as a feeble auth
or who cannot express his ideas properly.
   "In spite of his lack of amiability, I could not help seeing, in Rogojin a ma
n of intellect and sense; and although, perhaps, there was little in the outside
 world which was of. interest to him, still he was clearly a man with eyes to se
e.
   "I hinted nothing to him about my 'final conviction,' but it appeared to me t
hat he had guessed it from my words. He remained silent-he is a terribly silent 
man. I remarked to him, as I rose to depart, that, in spite of the contrast and 
the wide differences between us two, les extremites se touchent ('extremes meet,
' as I explained to him in Russian); so that maybe he was not so far from my fin
al conviction as appeared.
   "His only reply to this was a sour grimace. He rose and looked for my cap, an
d placed it in my hand, and led me out of the house-that dreadful gloomy house o
f his-to all appearances, of course, as though I were leaving of my own accord, 
and he were simply seeing me to the door out of politeness. His house impressed 
me much; it is like a burial-ground, he seems to like it, which is, however, qui
te natural. Such a full life as he leads is so overflowing with absorbing intere
sts that he has little need of assistance from his surroundings.
   "The visit to Rogojin exhausted me terribly. Besides, I had felt ill since th
e morning; and by evening I was so weak that I took to my bed, and was in high f
ever at intervals, and even delirious. Colia sat with me until eleven o'clock.
   "Yet I remember all he talked about, and every word we said, though whenever 
my eyes closed for a moment I could picture nothing but the image of Surikoff ju
st in the act of finding a million roubles. He could not make up his mind what t
o do with the money, and tore his hair over it. He trembled with fear that someb
ody would rob him, and at last he decided to bury it in the ground. I persuaded 
him that, instead of putting it all away uselessly underground, he had better me
lt it down and make a golden coffin out of it for his starved child, and then di
g up the little one and put her into the golden coffin. Surikoff accepted this s
uggestion, I thought, with tears of gratitude, and immediately commenced to carr
y out my design.
   "I thought I spat on the ground and left him in disgust. Colia told me, when 
I quite recovered my senses, that I had not been asleep for a moment, but that I
 had spoken to him about Surikoff the whole while.
   "At moments I was in a state of dreadful weakness and misery, so that Colia w
as greatly disturbed when he left me.
   "When I arose to lock the door after him, I suddenly called to mind a picture
 I had noticed at Rogojin's in one of his gloomiest rooms, over the door. He had
 pointed it out to me himself as we walked past it, and I believe I must have st
ood a good five minutes in front of it. There was nothing artistic about it, but
 the picture made me feel strangely uncomfortable. It represented Christ just ta
ken down from the cross. It seems to me that painters as a rule represent the Sa
viour, both on the cross and taken down from it, with great beauty still upon Hi
s face. This marvellous beauty they strive to preserve even in His moments of de
epest agony and passion. But there was no such beauty in Rogojin's picture. This
 was the presentment of a poor mangled body which had evidently suffered unbeara
ble anguish even before its crucifixion, full of wounds and bruises, marks of th
e violence of soldiers and people, and of the bitterness of the moment when He h
ad fallen with the cross-all this combined with the anguish of the actual crucif
ixion.
   "The face was depicted as though still suffering; as though the body, only ju
st dead, was still almost quivering with agony. The picture was one of pure natu
re, for the face was not beautified by the artist, but was left as it would natu
rally be, whosoever the sufferer, after such anguish.
   "I know that the earliest Christian faith taught that the Saviour suffered ac
tually and not figuratively, and that nature was allowed her own way even while 
His body was on the cross.
   "It is strange to look on this dreadful picture of the mangled corpse of the 
Saviour, and to put this question to oneself: 'Supposing that the disciples, the
 future apostles, the women who had followed Him and stood by the cross, all of 
whom believed in and worshipped Him-supposing that they saw this tortured body, 
this face so mangled and bleeding and bruised (and they MUST have so seen it)-ho
w could they have gazed upon the dreadful sight and yet have believed that He wo
uld rise again?' "The thought steps in, whether one likes it or no, that death i
s so terrible and so powerful, that even He who conquered it in His miracles dur
ing life was unable to triumph over it at the last.
   He who called to Lazarus, 'Lazarus, come forth!' and the dead man lived-He wa
s now Himself a prey to nature and death. Nature appears to one, looking at this
 picture, as some huge, implacable, dumb monster; or still better-a stranger sim
ile-some enormous mechanical engine of modern days which has seized and crushed 
and swallowed up a great and invaluable Being, a Being worth nature and all her 
laws, worth the whole earth, which was perhaps created merely for the sake of th
e advent of that Being.
   "This blind, dumb, implacable, eternal, unreasoning force is well shown in th
e picture, and the absolute subordination of all men and things to it is so well
 expressed that the idea unconsciously arises in the mind of anyone who looks at
 it. All those faithful people who were gazing at the cross and its mutilated oc
cupant must have suffered agony of mind that evening; for they must have felt th
at all their hopes and almost all their faith had been shattered at a blow. They
 must have separated in terror and dread that night, though each perhaps carried
 away with him one great thought which was never eradicated from his mind for ev
er afterwards. If this great Teacher of theirs could have seen Himself after the
 Crucifixion, how could He have consented to mount the Cross and to die as He di
d? This thought also comes into the mind of the man who gazes at this picture. I
 thought of all this by snatches probably between my attacks of delirium-for an 
hour and a half or so before Colia's departure.
   "Can there be an appearance of that which has no form? And yet it seemed to m
e, at certain moments, that I beheld in some strange and impossible form, that d
ark, dumb, irresistibly powerful, eternal force.
   "I thought someone led me by the hand and showed me, by the light of a candle
, a huge, loathsome insect, which he assured me was that very force, that very a
lmighty, dumb, irresistible Power, and laughed at the indignation with which I r
eceived this information. In my room they always light the little lamp before my
 icon for the night; it gives a feeble flicker of light, but it is strong enough
 to see by dimly, and if you sit just under it you can even read by it. I think 
it was about twelve or a little past that night. I had not slept a wink, and was
 lying with my eyes wide open, when suddenly the door opened, and in came Rogoji
n.
   "He entered, and shut the door behind him. Then he silently gazed at me and w
ent quickly to the corner of the room where the lamp was burning and sat down un
derneath it.
   "I was much surprised, and looked at him expectantly.
   "Rogojin only leaned his elbow on the table and silently stared at me. So pas
sed two or three minutes, and I recollect that his silence hurt and offended me 
very much. Why did he not speak?
   "That his arrival at this time of night struck me as more or less strange may
 possibly be the case; but I remember I was by no means amazed at it. On the con
trary, though I had not actually told him my thought in the morning, yet I know 
he understood it; and this thought was of such a character that it would not be 
anything very remarkable, if one were to come for further talk about it at any h
our of night, however late.
   "I thought he must have come for this purpose.
   "In the morning we had parted not the best of friends; I remember he looked a
t me with disagreeable sarcasm once or twice; and this same look I observed in h
is eyes now-which was the cause of the annoyance I felt.
   "I did not for a moment suspect that I was delirious and that this Rogojin wa
s but the result of fever and excitement. I had not the slightest idea of such a
 theory at first.
   "Meanwhile he continued to sit and stare jeeringly at me.
   "I angrily turned round in bed and made up my mind that I would not say a wor
d unless he did; so I rested silently on my pillow determined to remain dumb, if
 it were to last till morning. I felt resolved that he should speak first. Proba
bly twenty minutes or so passed in this way. Suddenly the idea struck me-what if
 this is an apparition and not Rogojin himself?
   "Neither during my illness nor at any previous time had I ever seen an appari
tion;-but I had always thought, both when I was a little boy, and even now, that
 if I were to see one I should die on the spot-though I don't believe in ghosts.
 And yet NOW, when the idea struck me that this was a ghost and not Rogojin at a
ll, I was not in the least alarmed. Nay-the thought actually irritated me. Stran
gely enough, the decision of the question as to whether this were a ghost or Rog
ojin did not, for some reason or other, interest me nearly so much as it ought t
o have done;-I think I began to muse about something altogether different. For i
nstance, I began to wonder why Rogojin, who had been in dressing-gown and slippe
rs when I saw him at home, had now put on a dress-coat and white waistcoat and t
ie? I also thought to myself, I remember-'if this is a ghost, and I am not afrai
d of it, why don't I approach it and verify my suspicions? Perhaps I am afraid-'
 And no sooner did this last idea enter my head than an icy blast blew over me; 
I felt a chill down my backbone and my knees shook.
   "At this very moment, as though divining my thoughts, Rogojin raised his head
 from his arm and began to part his lips as though he were going to laugh-but he
 continued to stare at me as persistently as before.
   "I felt so furious with him at this moment that I longed to rush at him; but 
as I had sworn that he should speak first, I continued to lie still-and the more
 willingly, as I was still by no means satisfied as to whether it really was Rog
ojin or not.
   "I cannot remember how long this lasted; I cannot recollect, either, whether 
consciousness forsook me at intervals, or not.
   But at last Rogojin rose, staring at me as intently as ever, but not smiling 
any longer,-and walking very softly, almost on tiptoes, to the door, he opened i
t, went out, and shut it behind him.
   "I did not rise from my bed, and I don't know how long I lay with my eyes ope
n, thinking. I don't know what I thought about, nor how I fell asleep or became 
insensible; but I awoke next morning after nine o'clock when they knocked at my 
door. My general orders are that if I don't open the door and call, by nine o'cl
ock, Matreona is to come and bring my tea. When I now opened the door to her, th
e thought suddenly struck me-how could he have come in, since the door was locke
d? I made inquiries and found that Rogojin himself could not possibly have come 
in, because all our doors were locked for the night.
   "Well, this strange circumstance-which I have described with so much detail-w
as the ultimate cause which led me to taking my final determination. So that no 
logic, or logical deductions, had anything to do with my resolve;-it was simply 
a matter of disgust.
   "It was impossible for me to go on living when life was full of such detestab
le, strange, tormenting forms. This ghost had humiliated me;-nor could I bear to
 be subordinate to that dark, horrible force which was embodied in the form of t
he loathsome insect. It was only towards evening, when I had quite made up my mi
nd on this point, that I began to feel easier.
      VII.
   "I HAD a small pocket pistol. I had procured it while still a boy, at that dr
oll age when the stories of duels and highwaymen begin to delight one, and when 
one imagines oneself nobly standing fire at some future day, in a duel.
   "There were a couple of old bullets in the bag which contained the pistol, an
d powder enough in an old flask for two or three charges.
   "The pistol was a wretched thing, very crooked and wouldn't carry farther tha
n fifteen paces at the most. However, it would send your skull flying well enoug
h if you pressed the muzzle of it against your temple.
   "I determined to die at Pavlofsk at sunrise, in the park-so as to make no com
motion in the house.
   "This 'explanation' will make the matter clear enough to the police. Students
 of psychology, and anyone else who likes, may make what they please of it. I sh
ould not like this paper, however, to be made public. I request the prince to ke
ep a copy himself, and to give a copy to Aglaya Ivanovna Epanchin. This is my la
st will and testament. As for my skeleton, I bequeath it to the Medical Academy 
for the benefit of science.
   "I recognize no jurisdiction over myself, and I know that I am now beyond the
 power of laws and judges.
   "A little while ago a very amusing idea struck me. What if I were now to comm
it some terrible crime-murder ten fellow-creatures, for instance, or anything el
se that is thought most shocking and dreadful in this world-what a dilemma my ju
dges would be in, with a criminal who only has a fortnight to live in any case, 
now that the rack and other forms of torture are abolished! Why, I should die co
mfortably in their own hospital-in a warm, clean room, with an attentive doctor-
probably much more comfortably than I should at home.
   "I don't understand why people in my position do not oftener indulge in such 
ideas-if only for a joke! Perhaps they do! Who knows! There are plenty of merry 
souls among us!
   "But though I do not recognize any jurisdiction over myself, still I know tha
t I shall be judged, when I am nothing but a voiceless lump of clay; therefore I
 do not wish to go before I have left a word of reply-the reply of a free man-no
t one forced to justify himself-oh no! I have no need to ask forgiveness of anyo
ne. I wish to say a word merely because I happen to desire it of my own free wil
l.
   "Here, in the first place, comes a strange thought!
   "Who, in the name of what Law, would think of disputing my full personal righ
t over the fortnight of life left to me? What jurisdiction can be brought to bea
r upon the case? Who would wish me, not only to be sentenced, but to endure the 
sentence to the end? Surely there exists no man who would wish such a thing-why 
should anyone desire it? For the sake of morality? Well, I can understand that i
f I were to make an attempt upon my own life while in the enjoyment of full heal
th and vigour-my life which might have been 'useful,' etc., etc.-morality might 
reproach me, according to the old routine, for disposing of my life without perm
ission-or whatever its tenet may be. But now, NOW, when my sentence is out and m
y days numbered! How can morality have need of my last breaths, and why should I
 die listening to the consolations offered by the prince, who, without doubt, wo
uld not omit to demonstrate that death is actually a benefactor to me? (Christia
ns like him always end up with that-it is their pet theory.) And what do they wa
nt with their ridiculous 'Pavlofsk trees'? To sweeten my last hours? Cannot they
 understand that the more I forget myself, the more I let myself become attached
 to these last illusions of life and love, by means of which they try to hide fr
om me Meyer's wall, and all that is so plainly written on it-the more unhappy th
ey make me? What is the use of all your nature to me-all your parks and trees, y
our sunsets and sunrises, your blue skies and your self-satisfied faces-when all
 this wealth of beauty and happiness begins with the fact that it accounts me-on
ly me-one too many! What is the good of all this beauty and glory to me, when ev
ery second, every moment, I cannot but be aware that this little fly which buzze
s around my head in the sun's rays-even this little fly is a sharer and particip
ator in all the glory of the universe, and knows its place and is happy in it;-w
hile I-only I, am an outcast, and have been blind to the fact hitherto, thanks t
o my simplicity! Oh! I know well how the prince and others would like me, instea
d of indulging in all these wicked words of my own, to sing, to the glory and tr
iumph of morality, that well-known verse of Gilbert's:
   "'0, puissent voir longtemps votre beaute sacree Tant d'amis, sourds a mes ad
ieux!
   Qu'ils meurent pleins de jours, que leur mort soit pleuree, Qu'un ami leur fe
rme les yeux!' "But believe me, believe me, my simple-hearted friends, that in t
his highly moral verse, in this academical blessing to the world in general in t
he French language, is hidden the intensest gall and bitterness; but so well con
cealed is the venom, that I dare say the poet actually persuaded himself that hi
s words were full of the tears of pardon and peace, instead of the bitterness of
 disappointment and malice, and so died in the delusion.
   "Do you know there is a limit of ignominy, beyond which man's consciousness o
f shame cannot go, and after which begins satisfaction in shame? Well, of course
 humility is a great force in that sense, I admit that-though not in the sense i
n which religion accounts humility to be strength!
   "Religion!-I admit eternal life-and perhaps I always did admit it.
   "Admitted that consciousness is called into existence by the will of a Higher
 Power; admitted that this consciousness looks out upon the world and says 'I am
;' and admitted that the Higher Power wills that the consciousness so called int
o existence, be suddenly extinguished (for so-for some unexplained reason-it is 
and must be)-still there comes the eternal question-why must I be humble through
 all this? Is it not enough that I am devoured, without my being expected to ble
ss the power that devours me?
   Surely-surely I need not suppose that Somebody-there-will be offended because
 I do not wish to live out the fortnight allowed me? I don't believe it.
   "It is much simpler, and far more likely, to believe that my death is needed-
the death of an insignificant atom-in order to fulfil the general harmony of the
 universe-in order to make even some plus or minus in the sum of existence. Just
 as every day the death of numbers of beings is necessary because without their 
annihilation the rest cannot live on-(although we must admit that the idea is no
t a particularly grand one in itself!) "However-admit the fact! Admit that witho
ut such perpetual devouring of one another the world cannot continue to exist, o
r could never have been organized-I am ever ready to confess that I cannot under
stand why this is so-but I'll tell you what I DO know, for certain. If I have on
ce been given to understand and realize that I AM-what does it matter to me that
 the world is organized on a system full of errors and that otherwise it cannot 
be organized at all? Who will or can judge me after this? Say what you like-the 
thing is impossible and unjust!
   "And meanwhile I have never been able, in spite of my great desire to do so, 
to persuade myself that there is no future existence, and no Providence.
   "The fact of the matter is that all this DOES exist, but that we know absolut
ely nothing about the future life and its laws!
   "But it is so difficult, and even impossible to understand, that surely I am 
not to be blamed because I could not fathom the incomprehensible?
   "Of course I know they say that one must be obedient, and of course, too, the
 prince is one of those who say so: that one must be obedient without questions,
 out of pure goodness of heart, and that for my worthy conduct in this matter I 
shall meet with reward in another world. We degrade God when we attribute our ow
n ideas to Him, out of annoyance that we cannot fathom His ways.
   "Again, I repeat, I cannot be blamed because I am unable to understand that w
hich it is not given to mankind to fathom. Why am I to be judged because I could
 not comprehend the Will and Laws of Providence? No, we had better drop religion
.
   "And enough of this. By the time I have got so far in the reading of my docum
ent the sun will be up and the huge force of his rays will be acting upon the li
ving world. So be it. I shall die gazing straight at the great Fountain of life 
and power; I do not want this life!
   "If I had had the power to prevent my own birth I should certainly never have
 consented to accept existence under such ridiculous conditions. However, I have
 the power to end my existence, although I do but give back days that are alread
y numbered. It is an insignificant gift, and my revolt is equally insignificant.
   "Final explanation: I die, not in the least because I am unable to support th
ese next three weeks. Oh no, I should find strength enough, and if I wished it I
 could obtain consolation from the thought of the injury that is done me. But I 
am not a French poet, and I do not desire such consolation. And finally, nature 
has so limited my capacity for work or activity of any kind, in allotting me but
 three weeks of time, that suicide is about the only thing left that I can begin
 and end in the time of my own free will.
   "Perhaps then I am anxious to take advantage of my last chance of doing somet
hing for myself. A protest is sometimes no small thing."
   The explanation was finished; Hippolyte paused at last.
   There is, in extreme cases, a final stage of cynical candour when a nervous m
an, excited, and beside himself with emotion, will be afraid of nothing and read
y for any sort of scandal, nay, glad of it. The extraordinary, almost unnatural,
 tension of the nerves which upheld Hippolyte up to this point, had now arrived 
at this final stage. This poor feeble boy of eighteen-exhausted by disease-looke
d for all the world as weak and frail as a leaflet torn from its parent tree and
 trembling in the breeze; but no sooner had his eye swept over his audience, for
 the first time during the whole of the last hour, than the most contemptuous, t
he most haughty expression of repugnance lighted up his face. He defied them all
, as it were. But his hearers were indignant, too; they rose to their feet with 
annoyance. Fatigue, the wine consumed, the strain of listening so long, all adde
d to the disagreeable impression which the reading had made upon them.
   Suddenly Hippolyte jumped up as though he had been shot.
   "The sun is rising," he cried, seeing the gilded tops of the trees, and point
ing to them as to a miracle. "See, it is rising now!"
   "Well, what then? Did you suppose it wasn't going to rise?" asked Ferdishenko
.
   "It's going to be atrociously hot again all day," said Gania, with an air of 
annoyance, taking his hat. "A month of this Are you coming home, Ptitsin?" Hippol
yte listened to this in amazement, almost amounting to stupefaction. Suddenly he
 became deadly pale and shuddered.
   "You manage your composure too awkwardly. I see you wish to insult me," he cr
ied to Gania. "You-you are a cur!" He looked at Gania with an expression of mali
ce.
   "What on earth is the matter with the boy? What phenomenal feeble-mindedness!
" exclaimed Ferdishenko.
   "Oh, he's simply a fool," said Gania.
   Hippolyte braced himself up a little.
   "I understand, gentlemen," he began, trembling as before, and stumbling over 
every word," that I have deserved your resentment, and-and am sorry that I shoul
d have troubled you with this raving nonsense" (pointing to his article),"or rat
her, I am sorry that I have not troubled you enough." He smiled feebly. "Have I 
troubled you, Evgenie Pavlovitch?" He suddenly turned on Evgenie with this quest
ion. "Tell me now, have I troubled you or not?"
   "Well, it was a little drawn out, perhaps; but-"
   "Come, speak out! Don't lie, for once in your life-speak out!" continued Hipp
olyte, quivering with agitation.
   "Oh, my good sir, I assure you it's entirely the same to me.
   Please leave me in peace," said Evgenie, angrily, turning his back on him.
   "Good-night, prince," said Ptitsin, approaching his host.
   "What are you thinking of? Don't go, he'll blow his brains out in a minute!" 
cried Vera Lebedeff, rushing up to Hippolyte and catching hold of his hands in a
 torment of alarm. "What are you thinking of? He said he would blow his brains o
ut at sunrise."
   "Oh, he won't shoot himself!" cried several voices, sarcastically.
   "Gentlemen, you'd better look out," cried Colia, also seizing Hippolyte by th
e hand. "Just look at him! Prince, what are you thinking of?" Vera and Colia, an
d Keller, and Burdovsky were all crowding round Hippolyte now and holding him do
wn.
   "He has the right-the right-"-murmured Burdovsky. "Excuse me, prince, but wha
t are your arrangements?" asked Lebedeff, tipsy and exasperated, going up to Mui
shkin.
   "What do you mean by 'arrangements'?"
   "No, no, excuse me! I'm master of this house, though I do not wish to lack re
spect towards you. You are master of the house too, in a way; but I can't allow 
this sort of thing-"
   "He won't shoot himself; the boy is only playing the fool," said General Ivol
gin, suddenly and unexpectedly, with indignation.
   "I know he won't, I know he won't, general; but I-I'm master here!"
   "Listen, Mr. Terentieff," said Ptitsin, who had bidden the prince good-night,
 and was now holding out his hand to Hippolyte; "I think you remark in that manu
script of yours, that you bequeath your skeleton to the Academy. Are you referri
ng to your own skeleton-I mean, your very bones?"
   "Yes, my bones, I-"
   "Quite so, I see; because, you know, little mistakes have occurred now and th
en. There was a case-"
   Why do you tease him?" cried the prince, suddenly.
   "You've moved him to tears," added Ferdishenko. But Hippolyte was by no means
 weeping. He was about to move from his place, when his four guards rushed at hi
m and seized him once more. There was a laugh at this.
   "He led up to this on purpose. He took the trouble of writing all that so tha
t people should come and grab him by the arm," observed Rogojin. "Good-night, pr
ince. What a time we've sat here, my very bones ache!"
   "If you really intended to shoot yourself, Terentieff," said Evgenie Pavlovit
ch, laughing, "if I were you, after all these compliments, I should just not sho
ot myself in order to vex them all."
   "They are very anxious to see me blow my brains out," said Hippolyte, bitterl
y.
   "Yes, they'll be awfully annoyed if they don't see it."
   "Then you think they won't see it?"
   "I am not trying to egg you on. On the contrary, I think it very likely that 
you may shoot yourself; but the principal thing is to keep cool," said Evgenie w
ith a drawl, and with great condescension.
   "I only now perceive what a terrible mistake I made in reading this article t
o them," said Hippolyte, suddenly, addressing Evgenie, and looking at him with a
n expression of trust and confidence, as though he were applying to a friend for
 counsel.
   "Yes, it's a droll situation; I really don't know what advice to give you," r
eplied Evgenie, laughing. Hippolyte gazed steadfastly at him, but said nothing. 
To look at him one might have supposed that he was unconscious at intervals.
   "Excuse me," said Lebedeff, "but did you observe the young gentleman's style?
 'I'll go and blow my brains out in the park,' says he,' so as not to disturb an
yone.' He thinks he won't disturb anybody if he goes three yards away, into the 
park, and blows his brains out there."
   "Gentlemen-" began the prince.
   "No, no, excuse me, most revered prince," Lebedeff interrupted, excitedly. "S
ince you must have observed yourself that this is no joke, and since at least ha
lf your guests must also have concluded that after all that has been said this y
outh MUST blow his brains out for honour's sake-I-as master of this house, and b
efore these witnesses, now call upon you to take steps."
   "Yes, but what am I to do, Lebedeff? What steps am I to take? I am ready."
   "I'll tell you. In the first place he must immediately deliver up the pistol 
which he boasted of, with all its appurtenances. If he does this I shall consent
 to his being allowed to spend the night in this house-considering his feeble st
ate of health, and of course conditionally upon his being under proper supervisi
on. But tomorrow he must go elsewhere. Excuse me, prince! Should he refuse to de
liver up his weapon, then I shall instantly seize one of his arms and General Iv
olgin the other, and we shall hold him until the police arrive and take the matt
er into their own hands.
   Mr. Ferdishenko will kindly fetch them."
   At this there was a dreadful noise; Lebedeff danced about in his excitement; 
Ferdishenko prepared to go for the police; Gania frantically insisted that it wa
s all nonsense, "for nobody was going to shoot themselves." Evgenie Pavlovitch s
aid nothing.
   "Prince," whispered Hippolyte, suddenly, his eyes all ablaze,
   "you don't suppose that I did not foresee all this hatred?" He looked at the 
prince as though he expected him to reply, for a moment. "Enough!" he added at l
ength, and addressing the whole company, he cried: "It's all my fault, gentlemen
! Lebedeff, here's the key," (he took out a small bunch of keys); "this one, the
 last but one-Colia will show you-Colia, where's Colia?" he cried, looking strai
ght at Colia and not seeing him. "Yes, he'll show you; he packed the bag with me
 this morning. Take him up, Colia; my bag is upstairs in the prince's study, und
er the table.
   Here's the key, and in the little case you'll find my pistol and the powder, 
and all. Colia packed it himself, Mr. Lebedeff; he'll show you; but it's on cond
ition that tomorrow morning, when I leave for Petersburg, you will give me back 
my pistol, do you hear? I do this for the prince's sake, not yours."
   "Capital, that's much better!" cried Lebedeff, and seizing the key he made of
f in haste.
   Colia stopped a moment as though he wished to say something; but Lebedeff dra
gged him away.
   Hippolyte looked around at the laughing guests. The prince observed that his 
teeth were chattering as though in a violent attack of ague.
   "What brutes they all are!" he whispered to the prince. Whenever he addressed
 him he lowered his voice.
   "Let them alone, you're too weak now-"
   Yes, directly; I'll go away directly. I'll-"
   Suddenly he embraced Muishkin.
   "Perhaps you think I am mad, eh?" he asked him, laughing very strangely.
   "No, but you-"
   "Directly, directly! Stand still a moment, I wish to look in your eyes; don't
 speak-stand so-let me look at you! I am bidding farewell to mankind."
   He stood so for ten seconds, gazing at the prince, motionless, deadly pale, h
is temples wet with perspiration; he held the prince's hand in a strange grip, a
s though afraid to let him go.
   "Hippolyte, Hippolyte, what is the matter with you?" cried Muishkin.
   "Directly! There, that's enough. I'll lie down directly. I must drink to the 
sun's health. I wish to-I insist upon it! Let go!"
   He seized a glass from the table, broke away from the prince, and in a moment
 had reached the terrace steps.
   The prince made after him, but it so happened that at this moment Evgenie Pav
lovitch stretched out his hand to say good-night. The next instant there was a g
eneral outcry, and then followed a few moments of indescribable excitement.
   Reaching the steps, Hippolyte had paused, holding the glass in his left hand 
while he put his right hand into his coat pocket.
   Keller insisted afterwards that he had held his right hand in his pocket all 
the while, when he was speaking to the prince, and that he had held the latter's
 shoulder with his left hand only.
   This circumstance, Keller affirmed, had led him to feel some suspicion from t
he first. However this may be, Keller ran after Hippolyte, but he was too late.
   He caught sight of something flashing in Hippolyte's right hand, and saw that
 it was a pistol. He rushed at him, but at that very instant Hippolyte raised th
e pistol to his temple and pulled the trigger. There followed a sharp metallic c
lick, but no report.
   When Keller seized the would-be suicide, the latter fell forward into his arm
s, probably actually believing that he was shot.
   Keller had hold of the pistol now. Hippolyte was immediately placed in a chai
r, while the whole company thronged around excitedly, talking and asking each ot
her questions. Every one of them had heard the snap of the trigger, and yet they
 saw a live and apparently unharmed man before them.
   Hippolyte himself sat quite unconscious of what was going on, and gazed aroun
d with a senseless expression.
   Lebedeff and Colia came rushing up at this moment.
   "What is it?" someone asked, breathlessly-"A misfire?"
   "Perhaps it wasn't loaded," said several voices.
   "It's loaded all right," said Keller, examining the pistol, "but-"
   "What! did it miss fire?"
   "There was no cap in it," Keller announced.
   It would be difficult to describe the pitiable scene that now followed. The f
irst sensation of alarm soon gave place to amusement; some burst out laughing lo
ud and heartily, and seemed to find a malicious satisfaction in the joke. Poor H
ippolyte sobbed hysterically; he wrung his hands; he approached everyone in turn
-even Ferdishenko-and took them by both hands, and swore solemnly that he had fo
rgotten-absolutely forgotten-"accidentally, and not on purpose,"-to put a cap in
-that he "had ten of them, at least, in his pocket." He pulled them out and show
ed them to everyone; he protested that he had not liked to put one in beforehand
 for fear of an accidental explosion in his pocket. That he had thought he would
 have lots of time to put it in afterwards-when required-and, that, in the heat 
of the moment, he had forgotten all about it. He threw himself upon the prince, 
then on Evgenie Pavlovitch. He entreated Keller to give him back the pistol, and
 he'd soon show them all that "his honour-his honour,"-but he was "dishonoured, 
now, for ever!"
   He fell senseless at last-and was carried into the prince's study.
   Lebedeff, now quite sobered down, sent for a doctor; and he and his daughter,
 with Burdovsky and General Ivolgin, remained by the sick man's couch.
   When he was carried away unconscious, Keller stood in the middle of the room,
 and made the following declaration to the company in general, in a loud tone of
 voice, with emphasis upon each word.
   "Gentlemen, if any one of you casts any doubt again, before me, upon Hippolyt
e's good faith, or hints that the cap was forgotten intentionally, or suggests t
hat this unhappy boy was acting a part before us, I beg to announce that the per
son so speaking shall account to me for his words."
   No one replied.
   The company departed very quickly, in a mass. Ptitsin, Gania, and Rogojin wen
t away together.
   The prince was much astonished that Evgenie Pavlovitch changed his mind, and 
took his departure without the conversation he had requested.
   "Why, you wished to have a talk with me when the others left?" he said.
   "Quite so," said Evgenie, sitting down suddenly beside him, "but I have chang
ed my mind for the time being. I confess, I am too disturbed, and so, I think, a
re you; and the matter as to which I wished to consult you is too serious to tac
kle with one's mind even a little disturbed; too serious both for myself and for
 you.
   You see, prince, for once in my life I wish to perform an absolutely honest a
ction, that is, an action with no ulterior motive; and I think I am hardly in a 
condition to talk of it just at this moment, and-and-well, we'll discuss it anot
her time.
   Perhaps the matter may gain in clearness if we wait for two or three days-jus
t the two or three days which I must spend in Petersburg."
   Here he rose again from his chair, so that it seemed strange that he should h
ave thought it worth while to sit down at all.
   The prince thought, too, that he looked vexed and annoyed, and not nearly so 
friendly towards himself as he had been earlier in the night.
   "I suppose you will go to the sufferer's bedside now?" he added.
   "Yes, I am afraid" began the prince.
   "Oh, you needn't fear! He'll live another six weeks all right.
   Very likely he will recover altogether; but I strongly advise you to pack him
 off tomorrow."
   "I think I may have offended him by saying nothing just now. I am afraid he m
ay suspect that I doubted his good faith,-about shooting himself, you know. What
 do you think, Evgenie Pavlovitch?"
   "Not a bit of it! You are much too good to him; you shouldn't care a hang abo
ut what he thinks. I have heard of such things before, but never came across, ti
ll tonight, a man who would actually shoot himself in order to gain a vulgar not
oriety, or blow out his brains for spite, if he finds that people don't care to 
pat him on the back for his sanguinary intentions. But what astonishes me more t
han anything is the fellow's candid confession of weakness. You'd better get rid
 of him tomorrow, in any case.
   "Do you think he will make another attempt?"
   "Oh no, not he, not now! But you have to be very careful with this sort of ge
ntleman. Crime is too often the last resource of these petty nonentities. This y
oung fellow is quite capable of cutting the throats of ten people, simply for a 
lark, as he told us in his 'explanation.' I assure you those confounded words of
 his will not let me sleep."
   "I think you disturb yourself too much."
   "What an extraordinary person you are, prince! Do you mean to say that you do
ubt the fact that he is capable of murdering ten men?"
   "I daren't say, one way or the other; all this is very strange-but-"
   "Well, as you like, just as you like," said Evgenie Pavlovitch, irritably. "O
nly you are such a plucky fellow, take care you don't get included among the ten
 victims!"
   "Oh, he is much more likely not to kill anyone at all," said the prince, gazi
ng thoughtfully at Evgenie. The latter laughed disagreeably.
   "Well, au revoir! Did you observe that he 'willed' a copy of his confession t
o Aglaya Ivanovna?"
   "Yes, I did; I am thinking of it."
   "In connection with 'the ten,' eh?" laughed Evgenie, as he left the room.
   An hour later, towards four o'clock, the prince went into the park. He had en
deavoured to fall asleep, but could not, owing to the painful beating of his hea
rt.
   He had left things quiet and peaceful; the invalid was fast asleep, and the d
octor, who had been called in, had stated that there was no special danger. Lebe
deff, Colia, and Burdovsky were lying down in the sick-room, ready to take it in
 turns to watch.
   There was nothing to fear, therefore, at home.
   But the prince's mental perturbation increased every moment. He wandered abou
t the park, looking absently around him, and paused in astonishment when he sudd
enly found himself in the empty space with the rows of chairs round it, near the
 Vauxhall. The look of the place struck him as dreadful now: so he turned round 
and went by the path which he had followed with the Epanchins on the way to the 
band, until he reached the green bench which Aglaya had pointed out for their re
ndezvous. He sat down on it and suddenly burst into a loud fit of laughter, imme
diately followed by a feeling of irritation. His disturbance of mind continued; 
he felt that he must go away somewhere, anywhere.
   Above his head some little bird sang out, of a sudden; he began to peer about
 for it among the leaves. Suddenly the bird darted out of the tree and away, and
 instantly he thought of the "fly buzzing about in the sun's rays" that Hippolyt
e had talked of; how that it knew its place and was a participator in the univer
sal life, while he alone was an "outcast." This picture had impressed him at the
 time, and he meditated upon it now. An old, forgotten memory awoke in his brain
, and suddenly burst into clearness and light. It was a recollection of Switzerl
and, during the first year of his cure, the very first months. At that time he h
ad been pretty nearly an idiot still; he could not speak properly, and had diffi
culty in understanding when others spoke to him. He climbed the mountain-side, o
ne sunny morning, and wandered long and aimlessly with a certain thought in his 
brain, which would not become clear. Above him was the blazing sky, below, the l
ake; all around was the horizon, clear and infinite.
   He looked out upon this, long and anxiously. He remembered how he had stretch
ed out his arms towards the beautiful, boundless blue of the horizon, and wept, 
and wept. What had so tormented him was the idea that he was a stranger to all t
his, that he was outside this glorious festival.
   What was this universe? What was this grand, eternal pageant to which he had 
yearned from his childhood up, and in which he could never take part? Every morn
ing the same magnificent sun; every morning the same rainbow in the waterfall; e
very evening the same glow on the snow-mountains.
   Every little fly that buzzed in the sun's rays was a singer in the universal 
chorus, "knew its place, and was happy in it.
   "Every blade of grass grew and was happy. Everything knew its path and loved 
it, went forth with a song and returned with a song; only he knew nothing, under
stood nothing, neither men nor words, nor any of nature's voices; he was a stran
ger and an outcast.
   Oh, he could not then speak these words, or express all he felt!
   He had been tormented dumbly; but now it appeared to him that he must have sa
id these very words-even then-and that Hippolyte must have taken his picture of 
the little fly from his tears and words of that time.
   He was sure of it, and his heart beat excitedly at the thought, he knew not w
hy.
   He fell asleep on the bench; but his mental disquiet continued through his sl
umbers.
   Just before he dozed off, the idea of Hippolyte murdering ten men flitted thr
ough his brain, and he smiled at the absurdity of such a thought.
   Around him all was quiet; only the flutter and whisper of the leaves broke th
e silence, but broke it only to cause it to appear yet more deep and still.
   He dreamed many dreams as he sat there, and all were full of disquiet, so tha
t he shuddered every moment.
   At length a woman seemed to approach him. He knew her, oh! he knew her only t
oo well. He could always name her and recognize her anywhere; but, strange, she 
seemed to have quite a different face from hers, as he had known it, and he felt
 a tormenting desire to be able to say she was not the same woman. In the face b
efore him there was such dreadful remorse and horror that he thought she must be
 a criminal, that she must have just committed some awful crime.
   Tears were trembling on her white cheek. She beckoned him, but placed her fin
ger on her lip as though to warn him that he must follow her very quietly. His h
eart froze within him. He wouldn't, he COULDN'T confess her to be a criminal, an
d yet he felt that something dreadful would happen the next moment, something wh
ich would blast his whole life.
   She seemed to wish to show him something, not far off, in the park.
   He rose from his seat in order to follow her, when a bright, clear peal of la
ughter rang out by his side. He felt somebody's hand suddenly in his own, seized
 it, pressed it hard, and awoke.
   Before him stood Aglaya, laughing aloud.
      VIII.
   SHE laughed, but she was rather angry too.
   "He's asleep! You were asleep," she said, with contemptuous surprise.
   "Is it really you?" muttered the prince, not quite himself as yet, and recogn
izing her with a start of amazement. "Oh yes, of course," he added, "this is our
 rendezvous. I fell asleep here."
   "So I saw."
   "Did no one awake me besides yourself? Was there no one else here? I thought 
there was another woman."
   "There was another woman here?"
   At last he was wide awake.
   "It was a dream, of course," he said, musingly. "Strange that I should have a
 dream like that at such a moment. Sit down-"
   He took her hand and seated her on the bench; then sat down beside her and re
flected.
   Aglaya did not begin the conversation, but contented herself with watching he
r companion intently.
   He looked back at her, but at times it was clear that he did not see her and 
was not thinking of her.
   Aglaya began to flush up.
   "Oh yes!" cried the prince, starting. "Hippolyte's suicide-"
   "What? At your house?" she asked, but without much surprise. "He was alive ye
sterday evening, wasn't he? How could you sleep here after that?" she cried, gro
wing suddenly animated.
   "Oh, but he didn't kill himself; the pistol didn't go off."
   Aglaya insisted on hearing the whole story. She hurried the prince along, but
 interrupted him with all sorts of questions, nearly all of which were irrelevan
t. Among other things, she seemed greatly interested in every word that Evgenie 
Pavlovitch had said, and made the prince repeat that part of the story over and 
over again.
   "Well, that'll do; we must be quick," she concluded, after hearing all. "We h
ave only an hour here, till eight; I must be home by then without fail, so that 
they may not find out that I came and sat here with you; but I've come on busine
ss. I have a great deal to say to you. But you have bowled me over considerably 
with your news. As to Hippolyte, I think his pistol was bound not to go off; it 
was more consistent with the whole affair. Are you sure he really wished to blow
 his brains out, and that there was no humbug about the matter?"
   "No humbug at all."
   "Very likely. So he wrote that you were to bring me a copy of his confession,
 did he? Why didn't you bring it?"
   "Why, he didn't die! I'll ask him for it, if you like."
   "Bring it by all means; you needn't ask him. He will be delighted, you may be
 sure; for, in all probability, he shot at himself simply in order that I might 
read his confession. Don't laugh at what I say, please, Lef Nicolaievitch, becau
se it may very well be the case."
   "I'm not laughing. I am convinced, myself, that that may have been partly the
 reason.
   "You are convinced? You don't really mean to say you think that honestly?" as
ked Aglaya, extremely surprised.
   She put her questions very quickly and talked fast, every now and then forget
ting what she had begun to say, and not finishing her sentence. She seemed to be
 impatient to warn the prince about something or other. She was in a state of un
usual excitement, and though she put on a brave and even defiant air, she seemed
 to be rather alarmed. She was dressed very simply, but this suited her well. Sh
e continually trembled and blushed, and she sat on the very edge of the seat.
   The fact that the prince confirmed her idea, about Hippolyte shooting himself
 that she might read his confession, surprised her greatly.
   "Of course," added the prince, "he wished us all to applaud his conduct-besid
es yourself."
   "How do you mean-applaud?"
   "Well-how am I to explain? He was very anxious that we should all come around
 him, and say we were so sorry for him, and that we loved him very much, and all
 that; and that we hoped he wouldn't kill himself, but remain alive. Very likely
 he thought more of you than the rest of us, because he mentioned you at such a 
moment, though perhaps he did not know himself that he had you in his mind's eye
."
   "I don't understand you. How could he have me in view, and not be aware of it
 himself? And yet, I don't know-perhaps I do. Do you know I have intended to poi
son myself at least thirty times-ever since I was thirteen or so-and to write to
 my parents before I did it? I used to think how nice it would be to lie in my c
offin, and have them all weeping over me and saying it was all their fault for b
eing so cruel, and all that-what are you smiling at?" she added, knitting her br
ow. "What do YOU think of when you go mooning about alone? I suppose you imagine
 yourself a fieldmarshal, and think you have conquered Napoleon?"
   "Well, I really have thought something of the sort now and then, especially w
hen just dozing off," laughed the prince. "Only it is the Austrians whom I conqu
er-not Napoleon."
   "I don't wish to joke with you, Lef Nicolaievitch. I shall see Hippolyte myse
lf. Tell him so. As for you, I think you are behaving very badly, because it is 
not right to judge a man's soul as you are judging Hippolyte's. You have no gent
leness, but only justice-so you are unjust."
   The prince reflected.
   "I think you are unfair towards me," he said. "There is nothing wrong in the 
thoughts I ascribe to Hippolyte; they are only natural. But of course I don't kn
ow for certain what he thought.
   Perhaps he thought nothing, but simply longed to see human faces once more, a
nd to hear human praise and feel human affection. Who knows? Only it all came ou
t wrong, somehow. Some people have luck, and everything comes out right with the
m; others have none, and never a thing turns out fortunately."
   "I suppose you have felt that in your own case," said Aglaya.
   "Yes, I have," replied the prince, quite unsuspicious of any irony in the rem
ark.
   "H'm-well, at all events, I shouldn't have fallen asleep here, in your place.
 It wasn't nice of you, that. I suppose you fall asleep wherever you sit down?"
   "But I didn't sleep a wink all night. I walked and walked about, and went to 
where the music was-"
   "What music?"
   "Where they played last night. Then I found this bench and sat down, and thou
ght and thought-and at last I fell fast asleep."
   "Oh, is that it? That makes a difference, perhaps. What did you go to the ban
dstand for?"
   "I don't know; I--"
   "Very well-afterwards. You are always interrupting me. What woman was it you 
were dreaming about?"
   "It was-about-you saw her-"
   "Quite so; I understand. I understand quite well. You are very-Well, how did 
she appear to you? What did she look like? No, I don't want to know anything abo
ut her," said Aglaya, angrily;
   "don't interrupt me-"
   She paused a moment as though getting breath, or trying to master her feeling
 of annoyance.
   "Look here; this is what I called you here for. I wish to make you a-to ask y
ou to be my friend. What do you stare at me like that for?" she added, almost an
grily.
   The prince certainly had darted a rather piercing look at her, and now observ
ed that she had begun to blush violently. At such moments, the more Aglaya blush
ed, the angrier she grew with herself; and this was clearly expressed in her eye
s, which flashed like fire. As a rule, she vented her wrath on her unfortunate c
ompanion, be it who it might. She was very conscious of her own shyness, and was
 not nearly so talkative as her sisters for this reason-in fact, at times she wa
s much too quiet. When, therefore, she was bound to talk, especially at such del
icate moments as this, she invariably did so with an air of haughty defiance. Sh
e always knew beforehand when she was going to blush, long before the blush came
.
   "Perhaps you do not wish to accept my proposition?" she asked, gazing haughti
ly at the prince.
   "Oh yes, I do; but it is so unnecessary. I mean, I did not think you need mak
e such a proposition," said the prince, looking confused.
   "What did you suppose, then? Why did you think I invited you out here? I supp
ose you think me a 'little fool,' as they all call me at home?"
   "I didn't know they called you a fool. I certainly don't think you one."
   "You don't think me one! Oh, dear me!-that's very clever of you; you put it s
o neatly, too."
   "In my opinion, you are far from a fool sometimes-in fact, you are very intel
ligent. You said a very clever thing just now about my being unjust because I ha
d ONLY justice. I shall remember that, and think about it."
   Aglaya blushed with pleasure. All these changes in her expression came about 
so naturally and so rapidly-they delighted the prince; he watched her, and laugh
ed.
   "Listen," she began again; "I have long waited to tell you all this, ever sin
ce the time when you sent me that letter-even before that. Half of what I have t
o say you heard yesterday. I consider you the most honest and upright of men-mor
e honest and upright than any other man; and if anybody says that your mind is-i
s sometimes affected, you know-it is unfair. I always say so and uphold it, beca
use even if your surface mind be a little affected (of course you will not feel 
angry with me for talking so-I am speaking from a higher point of view) yet your
 real mind is far better than all theirs put together. Such a mind as they have 
never even DREAMED of; because really, there are TWO minds-the kind that matters
, and the kind that doesn't matter. Isn't it so?"
   "May be! may be so!" said the prince, faintly; his heart was beating painfull
y.
   "I knew you would not misunderstand me," she said, triumphantly.
   "Prince S. and Evgenie Pavlovitch and Alexandra don't understand anything abo
ut these two kinds of mind, but, just fancy, mamma does!"
   "You are very like Lizabetha Prokofievna."
   "What! surely not?" said Aglaya.
   "Yes, you are, indeed."
   "Thank you; I am glad to be like mamma," she said, thoughtfully.
   "You respect her very much, don't you?" she added, quite unconscious of the n
aiveness of the question.
   "VERY much; and I am so glad that you have realized the fact."
   "I am very glad, too, because she is often laughed at by people.
   But listen to the chief point. I have long thought over the matter, and at la
st I have chosen you. I don't wish people to laugh at me; I don't wish people to
 think me a 'little fool.' I don't want to be chaffed. I felt all this of a sudd
en, and I refused Evgenie Pavlovitch flatly, because I am not going to be foreve
r thrown at people's heads to be married. I want-I want-well, I'll tell you, I w
ish to run away from home, and I have chosen you to help me."
   "Run away from home?" cried the prince.
   "Yes-yes-yes! Run away from home!" she repeated, in a transport of rage. "I w
on't, I won't be made to blush every minute by them all! I don't want to blush b
efore Prince S. or Evgenie Pavlovitch, or anyone, and therefore I have chosen yo
u. I shall tell you everything, EVERYTHING, even the most important things of al
l, whenever I like, and you are to hide nothing from me on your side. I want to 
speak to at least one person, as I would to myself. They have suddenly begun to 
say that I am waiting for you, and in love with you. They began this before you 
arrived here, and so I didn't show them the letter, and now they all say it, eve
ry one of them. I want to be brave, and be afraid of nobody. I don't want to go 
to their balls and things-I want to do good. I have long desired to run away, fo
r I have been kept shut up for twenty years, and they are always trying to marry
 me off. I wanted to run away when I was fourteen years old-I was a little fool 
then, I know-but now I have worked it all out, and I have waited for you to tell
 me about foreign countries. I have never seen a single Gothic cathedral. I must
 go to Rome; I must see all the museums; I must study in Paris. All this last ye
ar I have been preparing and reading forbidden books. Alexandra and Adelaida are
 allowed to read anything they like, but I mayn't. I don't want to quarrel with 
my sisters, but I told my parents long ago that I wish to change my social posit
ion. I have decided to take up teaching, and I count on you because you said you
 loved children. Can we go in for education together-if not at once, then afterw
ards? We could do good together. I won't be a general's daughter any more! Tell 
me, are you a very learned man?"
   "Oh no; not at all."
   "Oh-h-h! I'm sorry for that. I thought you were. I wonder why I always though
t so-but at all events you'll help me, won't you?
   Because I've chosen you, you know."
   "Aglaya Ivanovna, it's absurd."
   But I will, I WILL run away!" she cried-and her eyes flashed again with anger
-"and if you don't agree I shall go and marry Gavrila Ardalionovitch! I won't be
 considered a horrible girl, and accused of goodness knows what."
   "Are you out of your mind?" cried the prince, almost starting from his seat. 
"What do they accuse you of? Who accuses you?"
   "At home, everybody, mother, my sisters, Prince S., even that detestable Coli
a! If they don't say it, they think it. I told them all so to their faces. I tol
d mother and father and everybody. Mamma was ill all the day after it, and next 
day father and Alexandra told me that I didn't understand what nonsense I was ta
lking. I informed them that they little knew me-I was not a small child-I unders
tood every word in the language-that I had read a couple of Paul de Kok's novels
 two years since on purpose, so as to know all about everything. No sooner did m
amma hear me say this than she nearly fainted!"
   A strange thought passed through the prince's brain; he gazed intently at Agl
aya and smiled.
   He could not believe that this was the same haughty young girl who had once s
o proudly shown him Gania's letter. He could not understand how that proud and a
ustere beauty could show herself to be such an utter child-a child who probably 
did not even now understand some words.
   "Have you always lived at home, Aglaya Ivanovna?" he asked. "I mean, have you
 never been to school, or college, or anything?"
   "No-never-nowhere! I've been at home all my life, corked up in a bottle; and 
they expect me to be married straight out of it.
   What are you laughing at again? I observe that you, too, have taken to laughi
ng at me, and range yourself on their side against me," she added, frowning angr
ily. "Don't irritate me-I'm bad enough without that-I don't know what I am doing
 sometimes. I am persuaded that you came here today in the full belief that I am
 in love with you, and that I arranged this meeting because of that," she cried,
 with annoyance.
   "I admit I was afraid that that was the case, yesterday," blundered the princ
e (he was rather confused), "but today I am quite convinced that "
   "How?" cried Aglaya-and her lower lip trembled violently. "You were AFRAID th
at I-you dared to think that I-good gracious! you suspected, perhaps, that I sen
t for you to come here in order to catch you in a trap, so that they should find
 us here together, and make you marry me-"
   "Aglaya Ivanovna, aren't you ashamed of saying such a thing? How could such a
 horrible idea enter your sweet, innocent heart? I am certain you don't believe 
a word of what you say, and probably you don't even know what you are talking ab
out."
   Aglaya sat with her eyes on the ground; she seemed to have alarmed even herse
lf by what she had said.
   "No, I'm not; I'm not a bit ashamed!" she murmured. "And how do you know my h
eart is innocent? And how dared you send me a love-letter that time?"
   "LOVE-LETTER? My letter a love-letter? That letter was the most respectful of
 letters; it went straight from my heart, at what was perhaps the most painful m
oment of my life! I thought of you at the time as a kind of light. I-"
   "Well, very well, very well!" she said, but quite in a different tone. She wa
s remorseful now, and bent forward to touch his shoulder, though still trying no
t to look him in the face, as if the more persuasively to beg him not to be angr
y with her. "Very well," she continued, looking thoroughly ashamed of herself, "
I feel that I said a very foolish thing. I only did it just to try you. Take it 
as unsaid, and if I offended you, forgive me. Don't look straight at me like tha
t, please; turn your head away. You called it a 'horrible idea'; I only said it 
to shock you. Very often I am myself afraid of saying what I intend to say, and 
out it comes all the same. You have just told me that you wrote that letter at t
he most painful moment of your life. I know what moment that was!" she added sof
tly, looking at the ground again.
   "Oh, if you could know all!"
   "I DO know all!" she cried, with another burst of indignation.
   "You were living in the same house as that horrible woman with whom you ran a
way." She did not blush as she said this; on the contrary, she grew pale, and st
arted from her seat, apparently oblivious of what she did, and immediately sat d
own again. Her lip continued to tremble for a long time.
   There was silence for a moment. The prince was taken aback by the suddenness 
of this last reply, and did not know to what he should attribute it.
   "I don't love you a bit!" she said suddenly, just as though the words had exp
loded from her mouth.
   The prince did not answer, and there was silence again. "I love Gavrila Ardal
ionovitch," she said, quickly; but hardly audibly, and with her head bent lower 
than ever.
   "That is NOT true," said the prince, in an equally low voice.
   "What! I tell stories, do I? It is true! I gave him my promise a couple of da
ys ago on this very seat."
   The prince was startled, and reflected for a moment.
   "It is not true," he repeated, decidedly; "you have just invented it!"
   "You are wonderfully polite. You know he is greatly improved. He loves me bet
ter than his life. He let his hand burn before my very eyes in order to prove to
 me that he loved me better than his life!"
   "He burned his hand!"
   "Yes, believe it or not! It's all the same to me!"
   The prince sat silent once more. Aglaya did not seem to be joking; she was to
o angry for that.
   "What! he brought a candle with him to this place? That is, if the episode ha
ppened here; otherwise I can't "
   "Yes, a candle! What's there improbable about that?"
   "A whole one, and in a candlestick?"
   "Yes-no-half a candle-an end, you know-no, it was a whole candle; it's all th
e same. Be quiet, can't you! He brought a box of matches too, if you like, and t
hen lighted the candle and held his finger in it for half an hour and more!-Ther
e! Can't that be?"
   "I saw him yesterday, and his fingers were all right!"
   Aglaya suddenly burst out laughing, as simply as a child.
   "Do you know why I have just told you these lies?" She appealed to the prince
, of a sudden, with the most childlike candour, and with the laugh still trembli
ng on her lips. "Because when one tells a lie, if one insists on something unusu
al and eccentric-something too 'out of the way'' for anything, you know-the more
 impossible the thing is, the more plausible does the lie sound.
   I've noticed this. But I managed it badly; I didn't know how to work it." She
 suddenly frowned again at this point as though at some sudden unpleasant recoll
ection.
   "If"-she began, looking seriously and even sadly at him- "if when I read you 
all that about the 'poor knight,' I wished to-to praise you for one thing-I also
 wished to show you that I knew all-and did not approve of your conduct."
   "You are very unfair to me, and to that unfortunate woman of whom you spoke j
ust now in such dreadful terms, Aglaya."
   "Because I know all, all-and that is why I speak so. I know very well how you
-half a year since-offered her your hand before everybody. Don't interrupt me. Y
ou see, I am merely stating facts without any comment upon them. After that she 
ran away with Rogojin. Then you lived with her at some village or town, and she 
ran away from you." (Aglaya blushed dreadfully.) "Then she returned to Rogojin a
gain, who loves her like a madman. Then you -like a wise man as you are-came bac
k here after her as soon as ever you heard that she had returned to Petersburg. 
Yesterday evening you sprang forward to protect her, and just now you dreamed ab
out her. You see, I know all. You did come back here for her, for her-now didn't
 you?"
   "Yes-for her!" said the prince softly and sadly, and bending his head down, q
uite unconscious of the fact that Aglaya was gazing at him with eyes which burne
d like live coals. "I came to find out something-I don't believe in her future h
appiness as Rogojin's wife, although-in a word, I did not know how to help her o
r what to do for her-but I came, on the chance."
   He glanced at Aglaya, who was listening with a look of hatred on her face.
   "If you came without knowing why, I suppose you love her very much indeed!" s
he said at last.
   "No," said the prince, "no, I do not love her. Oh! if you only knew with what
 horror I recall the time I spent with her!"
   A shudder seemed to sweep over his whole body at the recollection.
   "Tell me about it," said Aglaya.
   "There is nothing which you might not hear. Why I should wish to tell you, an
d only you, this experience of mine, I really cannot say; perhaps it really is b
ecause I love you very much. This unhappy woman is persuaded that she is the mos
t hopeless, fallen creature in the world. Oh, do not condemn her! Do not cast st
ones at her! She has suffered too much already in the consciousness of her own u
ndeserved shame.
   "And she is not guilty-oh God!-Every moment she bemoans and bewails herself, 
and cries out that she does not admit any guilt, that she is the victim of circu
mstances-the victim of a wicked libertine.
   "But whatever she may say, remember that she does not believe it herself,-rem
ember that she will believe nothing but that she is a guilty creature.
   "When I tried to rid her soul of this gloomy fallacy, she suffered so terribl
y that my heart will never be quite at peace so long as I can remember that drea
dful time!-Do you know why she left me? Simply to prove to me what is not true-t
hat she is base. But the worst of it is, she did not realize herself that that w
as all she wanted to prove by her departure! She went away in response to some i
nner prompting to do something disgraceful, in order that she might say to herse
lf-'There-you've done a new act of shame-you degraded creature!' "Oh, Aglaya-per
haps you cannot understand all this. Try to realize that in the perpetual admiss
ion of guilt she probably finds some dreadful unnatural satisfaction-as though s
he were revenging herself upon someone.
   "Now and then I was able to persuade her almost to see light around her again
; but she would soon fall, once more, into her old tormenting delusions, and wou
ld go so far as to reproach me for placing myself on a pedestal above her (I nev
er had an idea of such a thing!), and informed me, in reply to my proposal of ma
rriage, that she 'did not want condescending sympathy or help from anybody.' You
 saw her last night. You don't suppose she can be happy among such people as tho
se-you cannot suppose that such society is fit for her? You have no idea how wel
l-educated she is, and what an intellect she has! She astonished me sometimes."
   "And you preached her sermons there, did you?"
   "Oh no," continued the prince thoughtfully, not noticing Aglaya's mocking ton
e, "I was almost always silent there. I often wished to speak, but I really did 
not know what to say. In some cases it is best to say nothing, I think. I loved 
her, yes, I loved her very much indeed; but afterwards-afterwards she guessed al
l."
   "What did she guess?"
   "That I only PITIED her-and-and loved her no longer!"
   "How do you know that? How do you know that she is not really in love with th
at-that rich cad-the man she eloped with?"
   "Oh no! I know she only laughs at him; she has made a fool of him all along."
   "Has she never laughed at you?"
   "No-in anger, perhaps. Oh yes! she reproached me dreadfully in anger; and suf
fered herself, too! But afterwards-oh! don't remind me-don't remind me of that!"
   He hid his face in his hands.
   "Are you aware that she writes to me almost every day?"
   "So that is true, is it?" cried the prince, greatly agitated.
   "I had heard a report of it, but would not believe it."
   "Whom did you hear it from?" asked Aglaya, alarmed. "Rogojin said something a
bout it yesterday, but nothing definite."
   "Yesterday! Morning or evening? Before the music or after?"
   "After-it was about twelve o'clock."
   "Ah! Well, if it was Rogojin-but do you know what she writes to me about?"
   "I should not be surprised by anything. She is mad!"
   "There are the letters." (Aglaya took three letters out of her pocket and thr
ew them down before the prince.) "For a whole week she has been entreating and w
orrying and persuading me to marry you. She-well, she is clever, though she may 
be mad-much cleverer than I am, as you say. Well, she writes that she is in love
 with me herself, and tries to see me every day, if only from a distance. She wr
ites that you love me, and that she has long known it and seen it, and that you 
and she talked about me-there. She wishes to see you happy, and she says that sh
e is certain only I can ensure you the happiness you deserve. She writes such st
range, wild letters-I haven't shown them to anyone. Now, do you know what all th
is means? Can you guess anything?"
   "It is madness-it is merely another proof of her insanity!" said the prince, 
and his lips trembled.
   "You are crying, aren't you?"
   "No, Aglaya. No, I'm not crying." The prince looked at her.
   "Well, what am I to do? What do you advise me? I cannot go on receiving these
 letters, you know."
   "Oh, let her alone, I entreat you!" cried the prince. What can you do in this
 dark, gloomy mystery? Let her alone, and I'll use all my power to prevent her w
riting you any more letters."
   "If so, you are a heartless man!" cried Aglaya. As if you can't see that it i
s not myself she loves, but you, you, and only you!
   Surely you have not remarked everything else in her, and only not THIS? Do yo
u know what these letters mean? They mean jealousy, sir-nothing but pure jealous
y! She-do you think she will ever really marry this Rogojin, as she says here sh
e will? She would take her own life the day after you and I were married."
   The prince shuddered; his heart seemed to freeze within him. He gazed at Agla
ya in wonderment; it was difficult for him to realize that this child was also a
 woman.
   "God knows, Aglaya, that to restore her peace of mind and make her happy I wo
uld willingly give up my life. But I cannot love her, and she knows that."
   "Oh, make a sacrifice of yourself! That sort of thing becomes you well, you k
now. Why not do it? And don't call me 'Aglaya'; you have done it several times l
ately. You are bound, it is your DUTY to 'raise' her; you must go off somewhere 
again to soothe and pacify her. Why, you love her, you know!"
   "I cannot sacrifice myself so, though I admit I did wish to do so once. Who k
nows, perhaps I still wish to! But I know for CERTAIN, that if she married me it
 would be her ruin; I know this and therefore I leave her alone. I ought to go t
o see her today; now I shall probably not go. She is proud, she would never forg
ive me the nature of the love I bear her, and we should both be ruined.
   This may be unnatural, I don't know; but everything seems unnatural. You say 
she loves me, as if this were LOVE! As if she could love ME, after what I have b
een through! No, no, it is not love."
   "How pale you have grown!" cried Aglaya in alarm.
   Oh, it's nothing. I haven't slept, that's all, and I'm rather tired. I-we cer
tainly did talk about you, Aglaya."
   "Oh, indeed, it is true then! YOU COULD ACTUALLY TALK ABOUT ME WITH HER; and-
and how could you have been fond of me when you had only seen me once?"
   "I don't know. Perhaps it was that I seemed to come upon light in the midst o
f my gloom. I told you the truth when I said I did not know why I thought of you
 before all others. Of course it was all a sort of dream, a dream amidst the hor
rors of reality.
   Afterwards I began to work. I did not intend to come back here for two or thr
ee years-"
   "Then you came for her sake?" Aglaya's voice trembled.
   "Yes, I came for her sake."
   There was a moment or two of gloomy silence. Aglaya rose from her seat.
   "If you say," she began in shaky tones, "if you say that this woman of yours 
is mad-at all events I have nothing to do with her insane fancies. Kindly take t
hese three letters, Lef Nicolaievitch, and throw them back to her, from me. And 
if she dares," cried Aglaya suddenly, much louder than before, "if she dares so 
much as write me one word again, tell her I shall tell my father, and that she s
hall be taken to a lunatic asylum."
   The prince jumped up in alarm at Aglaya's sudden wrath, and a mist seemed to 
come before his eyes.
   "You cannot really feel like that! You don't mean what you say.
   It is not true," he murmured.
   "It IS true, it IS true," cried Aglaya, almost beside herself with rage.
   "What's true? What's all this? What's true?" said an alarmed voice just besid
e them.
   Before them stood Lizabetha Prokofievna.
   "Why, it's true that I am going to marry Gavrila Ardalionovitch, that I love 
him and intend to elope with him tomorrow," cried Aglaya, turning upon her mothe
r. "Do you hear? Is your curiosity satisfied? Are you pleased with what you have
 heard?"
   Aglaya rushed away homewards with these words.
   "H'm! well, YOU are not going away just yet, my friend, at all events," said 
Lizabetha, stopping the prince. "Kindly step home with me, and let me have a lit
tle explanation of the mystery.
   Nice goings on, these! I haven't slept a wink all night as it is."
   The prince followed her.
      IX.
   ARRIVED at her house, Lizabetha Prokofievna paused in the first room. She cou
ld go no farther, and subsided on to a couch quite exhausted; too feeble to reme
mber so much as to ask the prince to take a seat. This was a large reception-roo
m, full of flowers, and with a glass door leading into the garden.
   Alexandra and Adelaida came in almost immediately, and looked inquiringly at 
the prince and their mother.
   The girls generally rose at about nine in the morning in the country; Aglaya,
 of late, had been in the habit of getting up rather earlier and having a walk i
n the garden, but not at seven o'clock; about eight or a little later was her us
ual time.
   Lizabetha Prokofievna, who really had not slept all night, rose at about eigh
t on purpose to meet Aglaya in the garden and walk with her; but she could not f
ind her either in the garden or in her own room.
   This agitated the old lady considerably; and she awoke her other daughters. N
ext, she learned from the maid that Aglaya had gone into the park before seven o
'clock. The sisters made a joke of Aglaya's last freak, and told their mother th
at if she went into the park to look for her, Aglaya would probably be very angr
y with her, and that she was pretty sure to be sitting reading on the green benc
h that she had talked of two or three days since, and about which she had nearly
 quarrelled with Prince S., who did not see anything particularly lovely in it.
   Arrived at the rendezvous of the prince and her daughter, and hearing the str
ange words of the latter, Lizabetha Prokofievna had been dreadfully alarmed, for
 many reasons. However, now that she had dragged the prince home with her, she b
egan to feel a little frightened at what she had undertaken. Why should not Agla
ya meet the prince in the park and have a talk with him, even if such a meeting 
should be by appointment?
   "Don't suppose, prince," she began, bracing herself up for the effort, "don't
 suppose that I have brought you here to ask questions. After last night, I assu
re you, I am not so exceedingly anxious to see you at all; I could have postpone
d the pleasure for a long while." She paused.
   "But at the same time you would be very glad to know how I happened to meet A
glaya Ivanovna this morning?" The prince finished her speech for her with the ut
most composure.
   "Well, what then? Supposing I should like to know?" cried Lizabetha Prokofiev
na, blushing. "I'm sure I am not afraid of plain speaking. I'm not offending any
one, and I never wish to, and-"
   "Pardon me, it is no offence to wish to know this; you are her mother. We met
 at the green bench this morning, punctually at seven o'clock,-according to an a
greement made by Aglaya Ivanovna with myself yesterday. She said that she wished
 to see me and speak to me about something important. We met and conversed for a
n hour about matters concerning Aglaya Ivanovna herself, and that's all."
   "Of course it is all, my friend. I don't doubt you for a moment," said Lizabe
tha Prokofievna with dignity.
   "Well done, prince, capital!" cried Aglaya, who entered the room at this mome
nt. "Thank you for assuming that I would not demean myself with lies. Come, is t
hat enough, mamma, or do you intend to put any more questions?"
   "You know I have never needed to blush before you, up to this day, though per
haps you would have been glad enough to make me," said Lizabetha Prokofievna,-wi
th majesty. "Good-bye, prince; forgive me for bothering you. I trust you will re
st assured of my unalterable esteem for you."
   The prince made his bows and retired at once. Alexandra and Adelaida smiled a
nd whispered to each other, while Lizabetha Prokofievna glared severely at them.
 "We are only laughing at the prince's beautiful bows, mamma," said Adelaida. "S
ometimes he bows just like a meal-sack, but to-day he was like-like Evgenie Pavl
ovitch!"
   "It is the HEART which is the best teacher of refinement and dignity, not the
 dancing-master," said her mother, sententiously, and departed upstairs to her o
wn room, not so much as glancing at Aglaya.
   When the prince reached home, about nine o'clock, he found Vera Lebedeff and 
the maid on the verandah. They were both busy trying to tidy up the place after 
last night's disorderly party.
   "Thank goodness, we've just managed to finish it before you came in!" said Ve
ra, joyfully.
   "Good-morning! My head whirls so; I didn't sleep all night. I should like to 
have a nap now."
   "Here, on the verandah? Very well, I'll tell them all not to come and wake yo
u. Papa has gone out somewhere."
   The servant left the room. Vera was about to follow her, but returned and app
roached the prince with a preoccupied air.
   "Prince!" she said, "have pity on that poor boy; don't turn him out today."
   "Not for the world; he shall do just as he likes."
   "He won't do any harm now; and-and don't be too severe with him,"
   "Oh dear no! Why-"
   "And-and you won't LAUGH at him? That's the chief thing."
   "Oh no! Never."
   "How foolish I am to speak of such things to a man like you," said Vera, blus
hing. "Though you DO look tired," she added, half turning away," your eyes are s
o splendid at this moment-so full of happiness."
   "Really?" asked the prince, gleefully, and he laughed in delight.
   But Vera, simple-minded little girl that she was (just like a boy, in fact), 
here became dreadfully confused, of a sudden, and ran hastily out of the room, l
aughing and blushing.
   "What a dear little thing she is," thought the prince, and immediately forgot
 all about her.
   He walked to the far end of the verandah, where the sofa stood, with a table 
in front of it. Here he sat down and covered his face with his hands, and so rem
ained for ten minutes. Suddenly he put his hand in his coat-pocket and hurriedly
 produced three letters.
   But the door opened again, and out came Colia.
   The prince actually felt glad that he had been interrupted,-and might return 
the letters to his pocket. He was glad of the respite.
   "Well," said Colia, plunging in medias res, as he always did,
   "here's a go! What do you think of Hippolyte now? Don't respect him any longe
r, eh?"
   "Why not? But look here, Colia, I'm tired; besides, the subject is too melanc
holy to begin upon again. How is he, though?"
   "Asleep-he'll sleep for a couple of hours yet. I quite understand-you haven't
 slept-you walked about the park, I know.
   Agitation-excitement-all that sort of thing-quite natural, too!"
   "How do you know I walked in the park and didn't sleep at home?"
   "Vera just told me. She tried to persuade me not to come, but I couldn't help
 myself, just for one minute. I have been having my turn at the bedside for the 
last two hours; Kostia Lebedeff is there now. Burdovsky has gone. Now, lie down,
 prince, make yourself comfortable, and sleep well! I'm awfully impressed, you k
now."
   "Naturally, all this-"
   "No, no, I mean with the 'explanation,' especially that part of it where he t
alks about Providence and a future life. There is a gigantic thought there."
   The prince gazed affectionately at Colia, who, of course, had come in solely 
for the purpose of talking about this "gigantic thought."
   "But it is not any one particular thought, only; it is the general circumstan
ces of the case. If Voltaire had written this now, or Rousseau, I should have ju
st read it and thought it remarkable, but should not have been so IMPRESSED by i
t. But a man who knows for certain that he has but ten minutes to live and can t
alk like that-why-it's-it's PRIDE, that is! It is really a most extraordinary, e
xalted assertion of personal dignity, it's-it's DEFIANT! What a GIGANTIC strengt
h of will, eh? And to accuse a fellow like that of not putting in the cap on pur
pose; it's base and mean! You know he deceived us last night, the cunning rascal
. I never packed his bag for him, and I never saw his pistol. He packed it himse
lf. But he put me off my guard like that, you see. Vera says you are going to le
t him stay on; I swear there's no danger, especially as we are always with him."
   "Who was by him at night?"
   "I, and Burdovsky, and Kostia Lebedeff. Keller stayed a little while, and the
n went over to Lebedeff's to sleep. Ferdishenko slept at Lebedeff's, too; but he
 went away at seven o'clock. My father is always at Lebedeff's; but he has gone 
out just now. I dare say Lebedeff will be coming in here directly; he has been l
ooking for you; I don't know what he wants. Shall we let him in or not, if you a
re asleep? I'm going to have a nap, too. By-theby, such a curious thing happened
. Burdovsky woke me at seven, and I met my father just outside the room, so drun
k, he didn't even know me. He stood before me like a log, and when he recovered 
himself, asked hurriedly how Hippolyte was. 'Yes,' he said, when I told him, 'th
at's all very well, but I REALLY came to warn you that you must be very careful 
what you say before Ferdishenko.' Do you follow me, prince?"
   "Yes. Is it really so? However, it's all the same to us, of course."
   "Of course it is; we are not a secret society; and that being the case, it is
 all the more curious that the general should have been on his way to wake me up
 in order to tell me this."
   "Ferdishenko has gone, you say?"
   "Yes, he went at seven o'clock. He came into the room on his way out; I was w
atching just then. He said he was going to spend 'the rest of the night' at Wilk
in's; there's a tipsy fellow, a friend of his, of that name. Well, I'm off. Oh, 
here's Lebedeff himself!
   The prince wants to go to sleep, Lukian Timofeyovitch, so you may just go awa
y again."
   "One moment, my dear prince, just one. I must absolutely speak to you about s
omething which is most grave," said Lebedeff, mysteriously and solemnly, enterin
g the room with a bow and looking extremely important. He had but just returned,
 and carried his hat in his hand. He looked preoccupied and most unusually digni
fied.
   The prince begged him to take a chair.
   "I hear you have called twice; I suppose you are still worried about yesterda
y's affair."
   "What, about that boy, you mean? Oh dear no, yesterday my ideas were a little
-well-mixed. Today, I assure you, I shall not oppose in the slightest degree any
 suggestions it may please you to make."
   "What's up with you this morning, Lebedeff? You look so important and dignifi
ed, and you choose your words so carefully," said the prince, smiling.
   "Nicolai Ardalionovitch!" said Lebedeff, in a most amiable tone of voice, add
ressing the boy. "As I have a communication to make to the prince which concerns
 only myself-"
   "Of course, of course, not my affair. All right," said Colia, and away he wen
t.
   "I love that boy for his perception," said Lebedeff, looking after him. "My d
ear prince," he continued, "I have had a terrible misfortune, either last night 
or early this morning. I cannot tell the exact time."
   "What is it?"
   "I have lost four hundred roubles out of my side pocket! They're gone!" said 
Lebedeff, with a sour smile.
   "You've lost four hundred roubles? Oh! I'm sorry for that."
   "Yes, it is serious for a poor man who lives by his toil."
   "Of course, of course! How was it?"
   "Oh, the wine is to blame, of course. I confess to you, prince, as I would to
 Providence itself. Yesterday I received four hundred roubles from a debtor at a
bout five in the afternoon, and came down here by train. I had my purse in my po
cket. When I changed, I put the money into the pocket of my plain clothes, inten
ding to keep it by me, as I expected to have an applicant for it in the evening.
"
   "It's true then, Lebedeff, that you advertise to lend money on gold or silver
 articles?"
   "Yes, through an agent. My own name doesn't appear. I have a large family, yo
u see, and at a small percentage-"
   "Quite so, quite so. I only asked for information-excuse the question. Go on.
"
   "Well, meanwhile that sick boy was brought here, and those guests came in, an
d we had tea, and-well, we made merry-to my ruin!
   Hearing of your birthday afterwards, and excited with the circumstances of th
e evening, I ran upstairs and changed my plain clothes once more for my uniform 
[Civil Service clerks in Russia wear uniform.]-you must have noticed I had my un
iform on all the evening? Well, I forgot the money in the pocket of my old coat-
you know when God will ruin a man he first of all bereaves him of his senses-and
 it was only this morning at half-past seven that I woke up and grabbed at my co
at pocket, first thing. The pocket was empty-the purse gone, and not a trace to 
be found!"
   "Dear me! This is very unpleasant!"
   "Unpleasant! Indeed it is. You have found a very appropriate expression," sai
d Lebedeff, politely, but with sarcasm.
   "But what's to be done? It's a serious matter," said the prince, thoughtfully
. "Don't you think you may have dropped it out of your pocket whilst intoxicated
?"
   "Certainly. Anything is possible when one is intoxicated, as you neatly expre
ss it, prince. But consider-if I, intoxicated or not, dropped an object out of m
y pocket on to the ground, that object ought to remain on the ground. Where is t
he object, then?"
   "Didn't you put it away in some drawer, perhaps?"
   "I've looked everywhere, and turned out everything."
   "I confess this disturbs me a good deal. Someone must have picked it up, then
."
   "Or taken it out of my pocket-two alternatives."
   "It is very distressing, because WHO-? That's the question!"
   "Most undoubtedly, excellent prince, you have hit it-that is the very questio
n. How wonderfully you express the exact situation in a few words!"
   "Come, come, Lebedeff, no sarcasm! It's a serious-"
   "Sarcasm!" cried Lebedeff, wringing his hands.
   "All right, all right, I'm not angry. I'm only put out about this. Whom do yo
u suspect?"
   "That is a very difficult and complicated question. I cannot suspect the serv
ant, for she was in the kitchen the whole evening, nor do I suspect any of my ch
ildren."
   "I should think not. Go on."
   "Then it must be one of the guests."
   "Is such a thing possible?"
   "Absolutely and utterly impossible-and yet, so it must be. But one thing I am
 sure of, if it be a theft, it was committed, not in the evening when we were al
l together, but either at night or early in the morning; therefore, by one of th
ose who slept here.
   Burdovsky and Colia I except, of course. They did not even come into my room.
"
   "Yes, or even if they had! But who did sleep with you?" "Four of us, includin
g myself, in two rooms. The general, myself, Keller, and Ferdishenko. One of us 
four it must have been. I don't suspect myself, though such cases have been know
n."
   "Oh! DO go on, Lebedeff! Don't drag it out so."
   "Well, there are three left, then-Keller firstly. He is a drunkard to begin w
ith, and a liberal (in the sense of other people's pockets), otherwise with more
 of the ancient knight about him than of the modern liberal. He was with the sic
k man at first, but came over afterwards because there was no place to lie down 
in the room and the floor was so hard."
   "You suspect him?"
   "I DID suspect him. When I woke up at half-past seven and tore my hair in des
pair for my loss and carelessness, I awoke the general, who was sleeping the sle
ep of innocence near me. Taking into consideration the sudden disappearance of F
erdishenko, which was suspicious in itself, we decided to search Keller, who was
 lying there sleeping like a top. Well, we searched his clothes thoroughly, and 
not a farthing did we find; in fact, his pockets all had holes in them. We found
 a dirty handkerchief, and a loveletter from some scullery-maid. The general dec
ided that he was innocent. We awoke him for further inquiries, and had the great
est difficulty in making him understand what was up. He opened his mouth and sta
red-he looked so stupid and so absurdly innocent. It wasn't Keller."
   "Oh, I'm so glad!" said the prince, joyfully. "I was so afraid."
   "Afraid! Then you had some grounds for supposing he might be the culprit?" sa
id Lebedeff, frowning.
   "Oh no-not a bit! It was foolish of me to say I was afraid!
   Don't repeat it please, Lebedeff, don't tell anyone I said that!"
   "My dear prince! your words lie in the lowest depth of my heart-it is their t
omb!" said Lebedeff, solemnly, pressing his hat to the region of his heart.
   "Thanks; very well. Then I suppose it's Ferdishenko; that is, I mean, you sus
pect Ferdishenko?"
   "Whom else?" said Lebedeff, softly, gazing intently into the prince s face.
   "Of course-quite so, whom else? But what are the proofs?"
   "We have evidence. In the first place, his mysterious disappearance at seven 
o'clock, or even earlier."
   "I know, Colia told me that he had said he was off to-I forget the name, some
 friend of his, to finish the night."
   "H'm! then Colia has spoken to you already?"
   "Not about the theft."
   "He does not know of it; I have kept it a secret. Very well, Ferdishenko went
 off to Wilkin's. That is not so curious in itself, but here the evidence opens 
out further. He left his address, you see, when he went. Now prince, consider, w
hy did he leave his address? Why do you suppose he went out of his way to tell C
olia that he had gone to Wilkin's? Who cared to know that he was going to Wilkin
's? No, no! prince, this is finesse, thieves' finesse! This is as good as saying
, 'There, how can I be a thief when I leave my address? I'm not concealing my mo
vements as a thief would.' Do you understand, prince?"
   "Oh yes, but that is not enough."
   "Second proof. The scent turns out to be false, and the address given is a sh
am. An hour after-that is at about eight, I went to Wilkin's myself, and there w
as no trace of Ferdishenko. The maid did tell me, certainly, that an hour or so 
since someone had been hammering at the door, and had smashed the bell; she said
 she would not open the door because she didn't want to wake her master; probabl
y she was too lazy to get up herself. Such phenomena are met with occasionally!"
   "But is that all your evidence? It is not enough!"
   "Well, prince, whom are we to suspect, then? Consider!" said Lebedeff with al
most servile amiability, smiling at the prince.
   There was a look of cunning in his eyes, however.
   "You should search your room and all the cupboards again," said the prince, a
fter a moment or two of silent reflection.
   "But I have done so, my dear prince!" said Lebedeff, more sweetly than ever.
   "H'm! why must you needs go up and change your coat like that?" asked the pri
nce, banging the table with his fist, in annoyance.
   "Oh, don't be so worried on my account, prince! I assure you I am not worth i
t! At least, not I alone. But I see you are suffering on behalf of the criminal 
too, for wretched Ferdishenko, in fact!"
   "Of course you have given me a disagreeable enough thing to think about," sai
d the prince, irritably, "but what are you going to do, since you are so sure it
 was Ferdishenko?"
   "But who else COULD it be, my very dear prince?" repeated Lebedeff, as sweet 
as sugar again. "If you don't wish me to suspect Mr. Burdovsky?"
   "Of course not."
   "Nor the general? Ha, ha, ha!"
   "Nonsense!" said the prince, angrily, turning round upon him.
   "Quite so, nonsense! Ha, ha, ha! dear me! He did amuse me, did the general! W
e went off on the hot scent to Wilkin's together, you know; but I must first obs
erve that the general was even more thunderstruck than I myself this morning, wh
en I awoke him after discovering the theft; so much so that his very face change
d-he grew red and then pale, and at length flew into a paroxysm of such noble wr
ath that I assure you I was quite surprised! He is a most generous-hearted man! 
He tells lies by the thousands, I know, but it is merely a weakness; he is a man
 of the highest feelings; a simple-minded man too, and a man who carries the con
viction of innocence in his very appearance. I love that man, sir; I may have to
ld you so before; it is a weakness of mine.
   Well-he suddenly stopped in the middle of the road, opened out his coat and b
ared his breast. "Search me," he says, "you searched Keller; why don't you searc
h me too? It is only fair!" says he. And all the while his legs and hands were t
rembling with anger, and he as white as a sheet all over! So I said to him,
   "Nonsense, general; if anybody but yourself had said that to me, I'd have tak
en my head, my own head, and put it on a large dish and carried it round to anyo
ne who suspected you; and I should have said: 'There, you see that head? It's my
 head, and I'll go bail with that head for him! Yes, and walk through the fire f
or him, too. There,' says I, 'that's how I'd answer for you, general!' Then he e
mbraced me, in the middle of the street, and hugged me so tight (crying over me 
all the while) that I coughed fit to choke! 'You are the one friend left to me a
mid all my misfortunes,' says he. Oh, he's a man of sentiment, that! He went on 
to tell me a story of how he had been accused, or suspected, of stealing five hu
ndred thousand roubles once, as a young man; and how, the very next day, he had 
rushed into a burning, blazing house and saved the very count who suspected him,
 and Nina Alexandrovna (who was then a young girl), from a fiery death. The coun
t embraced him, and that was how he came to marry Nina Alexandrovna, he said. As
 for the money, it was found among the ruins next day in an English iron box wit
h a secret lock; it had got under the floor somehow, and if it had not been for 
the fire it would never have been found! The whole thing is, of course, an absol
ute fabrication, though when he spoke of Nina Alexandrovna he wept! She's a gran
d woman, is Nina Alexandrovna, though she is very angry with me!"
   "Are you acquainted with her?"
   "Well, hardly at all. I wish I were, if only for the sake of justifying mysel
f in her eyes. Nina Alexandrovna has a grudge against me for, as she thinks, enc
ouraging her husband in drinking; whereas in reality I not only do not encourage
 him, but I actually keep him out of harm's way, and out of bad company.
   Besides, he's my friend, prince, so that I shall not lose sight of him, again
. Where he goes, I go. He's quite given up visiting the captain's widow, though 
sometimes he thinks sadly of her, especially in the morning, when he's putting o
n his boots. I don't know why it's at that time. But he has no money, and it's n
o use his going to see her without. Has he borrowed any money from you, prince?"
   "No, he has not."
   "Ah, he's ashamed to! He MEANT to ask you, I know, for he said so. I suppose 
he thinks that as you gave him some once (you remember), you would probably refu
se if he asked you again."
   "Do you ever give him money?"
   "Prince! Money! Why I would give that man not only my money, but my very life
, if he wanted it. Well, perhaps that's exaggeration; not life, we'll say, but s
ome illness, a boil or a bad cough, or anything of that sort, I would stand with
 pleasure, for his sake; for I consider him a great man fallen-money, indeed!"
   "H'm, then you DO give him money?"
   "N-no, I have never given him money, and he knows well that I will never give
 him any; because I am anxious to keep him out of intemperate ways. He is going 
to town with me now; for you must know I am off to Petersburg after Ferdishenko,
 while the scent is hot; I'm certain he is there. I shall let the general go one
 way, while I go the other; we have so arranged matters in order to pop out upon
 Ferdishenko, you see, from different sides. But I am going to follow that naugh
ty old general and catch him, I know where, at a certain widow's house; for I th
ink it will be a good lesson, to put him to shame by catching him with the widow
."
   "Oh, Lebedeff, don't, don't make any scandal about it!" said the prince, much
 agitated, and speaking in a low voice.
   "Not for the world, not for the world! I merely wish to make him ashamed of h
imself. Oh, prince, great though this misfortune be to myself, I cannot help thi
nking of his morals! I have a great favour to ask of you, esteemed prince; I con
fess that it is the chief object of my visit. You know the Ivolgins, you have ev
en lived in their house; so if you would lend me your help, honoured prince, in 
the general's own interest and for his good."
   Lebedeff clasped his hands in supplication.
   "What help do you want from me? You may be certain that I am most anxious to 
understand you, Lebedeff."
   "I felt sure of that, or I should not have come to you. We might manage it wi
th the help of Nina Alexandrovna, so that he might be closely watched in his own
 house. Unfortunately I am not on terms otherwise but Nicolai Ardalionovitch, who 
adores you with all his youthful soul, might help, too."
   "No, no! Heaven forbid that we should bring Nina Alexandrovna into this busin
ess! Or Colia, either. But perhaps I have not yet quite understood you, Lebedeff
?"
   Lebedeff made an impatient movement.
   "But there is nothing to understand! Sympathy and tenderness, that is all-tha
t is all our poor invalid requires! You will permit me to consider him an invali
d?"
   "Yes, it shows delicacy and intelligence on your part."
   "I will explain my idea by a practical example, to make it clearer. You know 
the sort of man he is. At present his only failing is that he is crazy about tha
t captain's widow, and he cannot go to her without money, and I mean to catch hi
m at her house today-for his own good; but supposing it was not only the widow, 
but that he had committed a real crime, or at least some very dishonourable acti
on (of which he is, of course, incapable), I repeat that even in that case, if h
e were treated with what I may call generous tenderness, one could get at the wh
ole truth, for he is very soft-hearted! Believe me, he would betray himself befo
re five days were out; he would burst into tears, and make a clean breast of the
 matter; especially if managed with tact, and if you and his family watched his 
every step, so to speak. Oh, my dear prince," Lebedeff added most emphatically, 
"I do not positively assert that he has I am ready, as the saying is, to shed my 
last drop of blood for him this instant; but you will admit that debauchery, dru
nkenness, and the captain's widow, all these together may lead him very far."
   "I am, of course, quite ready to add my efforts to yours in such a case," sai
d the prince, rising; "but I confess, Lebedeff, that I am terribly perplexed. Te
ll me, do you still think plainly, you say yourself that you suspect Mr. Ferdishe
nko?"
   Lebedeff clasped his hands once more.
   "Why, who else could I possibly suspect? Who else, most outspoken prince?" he
 replied, with an unctuous smile.
   Muishkin frowned, and rose from his seat.
   "You see, Lebedeff, a mistake here would be a dreadful thing.
   This Ferdishenko, I would not say a word against him, of course; but, who kno
ws? Perhaps it really was he? I mean he really does seem to be a more likely man
 than than any other."
   Lebedeff strained his eyes and ears to take in what the prince was saying. Th
e latter was frowning more and more, and walking excitedly up and down, trying n
ot to look at Lebedeff.
   "You see," he said, "I was given to understand that Ferdishenko was that sort
 of man,-that one can't say everything before him.
   One has to take care not to say too much, you understand? I say this to prove
 that he really is, so to speak, more likely to have done this than anyone else,
 eh? You understand? The important thing is, not to make a mistake."
   "And who told you this about Ferdishenko?"
   "Oh, I was told. Of course I don't altogether believe it. I am very sorry tha
t I should have had to say this, because I assure you I don't believe it myself;
 it is all nonsense, of course. It was stupid of me to say anything about it."
   "You see, it is very important, it is most important to know where you got th
is report from," said Lebedeff, excitedly. He had risen from his seat, and was t
rying to keep step with the prince, running after him, up and down. "Because loo
k here, prince, I don't mind telling you now that as we were going along to Wilk
in's this morning, after telling me what you know about the fire, and saving the
 count and all that, the general was pleased to drop certain hints to the same e
ffect about Ferdishenko, but so vaguely and clumsily that I thought better to pu
t a few questions to him on the matter, with the result that I found the whole t
hing was an invention of his excellency's own mind. Of course, he only lies with
 the best intentions; still, he lies.
   But, such being the case, where could you have heard the same report? It was 
the inspiration of the moment with him, you understand, so who could have told Y
OU? It is an important question, you see!"
   "It was Colia told me, and his father told HIM at about six this morning. The
y met at the threshold, when Colia was leaving the room for something or other."
 The prince told Lebedeff all that Colia had made known to himself, in detail.
   "There now, that's what we may call SCENT!" said Lebedeff, rubbing his hands 
and laughing silently. "I thought it must be so, you see. The general interrupte
d his innocent slumbers, at six o'clock, in order to go and wake his beloved son
, and warn him of the dreadful danger of companionship with Ferdishenko.
   Dear me! what a dreadfully dangerous man Ferdishenko must be, and what touchi
ng paternal solicitude, on the part of his excellency, ha! ha! ha!"
   "Listen, Lebedeff," began the prince, quite overwhelmed; "DO act quietly-don'
t make a scandal, Lebedeff, I ask you-I entreat you! No one must know-NO ONE, mi
nd! In that case only, I will help you."
   "Be assured, most honourable, most worthy of princes-be assured that the whol
e matter shall be buried within my heart!" cried Lebedeff, in a paroxysm of exal
tation. "I'd give every drop of my blood Illustrious prince, I am a poor wretch i
n soul and spirit, but ask the veriest scoundrel whether he would prefer to deal
 with one like himself, or with a noble-hearted man like you, and there is no do
ubt as to his choice! He'll answer that he prefers the noble-hearted man-and the
re you have the triumph of virtue! Au revoir, honoured prince! You and I togethe
r-softly! softly!"
      X.
   THE prince understood at last why he shivered with dread every time he though
t of the three letters in his pocket, and why he had put off reading them until 
the evening.
   When he fell into a heavy sleep on the sofa on the verandah, without having h
ad the courage to open a single one of the three envelopes, he again dreamed a p
ainful dream, and once more that poor, "sinful" woman appeared to him. Again she
 gazed at him with tears sparkling on her long lashes, and beckoned him after he
r; and again he awoke, as before, with the picture of her face haunting him.
   He longed to get up and go to her at once-but he COULD NOT. At length, almost
 in despair, he unfolded the letters, and began to read them.
   These letters, too, were like a dream. We sometimes have strange, impossible 
dreams, contrary to all the laws of nature. When we awake we remember them and w
onder at their strangeness. You remember, perhaps, that you were in full possess
ion of your reason during this succession of fantastic images; even that you act
ed with extraordinary logic and cunning while surrounded by murderers who hid th
eir intentions and made great demonstrations of friendship, while waiting for an
 opportunity to cut your throat. You remember how you escaped them by some ingen
ious stratagem; then you doubted if they were really deceived, or whether they w
ere only pretending not to know your hiding-place; then you thought of another p
lan and hoodwinked them once again.
   You remember all this quite clearly, but how is it that your reason calmly ac
cepted all the manifest absurdities and impossibilities that crowded into your d
ream? One of the murderers suddenly changed into a woman before your very eyes; 
then the woman was transformed into a hideous, cunning little dwarf; and you bel
ieved it, and accepted it all almost as a matter of course-while at the same tim
e your intelligence seemed unusually keen, and accomplished miracles of cunning,
 sagacity, and logic! Why is it that when you awake to the world of realities yo
u nearly always feel, sometimes very vividly, that the vanished dream has carrie
d with it some enigma which you have failed to solve? You smile at the extravaga
nce of your dream, and yet you feel that this tissue of absurdity contained some
 real idea, something that belongs to your true life,-something that exists, and
 has always existed, in your heart. You search your dream for some prophecy that
 you were expecting. It has left a deep impression upon you, joyful or cruel, bu
t what it means, or what has been predicted to you in it, you can neither unders
tand nor remember.
   The reading of these letters produced some such effect upon the prince. He fe
lt, before he even opened the envelopes, that the very fact of their existence w
as like a nightmare. How could she ever have made up her mind to write to her? h
e asked himself. How could she write about that at all? And how could such a wil
d idea have entered her head? And yet, the strangest part of the matter was, tha
t while he read the letters, he himself almost believed in the possibility, and 
even in the justification, of the idea he had thought so wild. Of course it was 
a mad dream, a nightmare, and yet there was something cruelly real about it. For
 hours he was haunted by what he had read. Several passages returned again and a
gain to his mind, and as he brooded over them, he felt inclined to say to himsel
f that he had foreseen and known all that was written here; it even seemed to hi
m that he had read the whole of this some time or other, long, long ago; and all
 that had tormented and grieved him up to now was to be found in these old, long
 since read, letters.
   "When you open this letter" (so the first began), "look first at the signatur
e. The signature will tell you all, so that I need explain nothing, nor attempt 
to justify myself. Were I in any way on a footing with you, you might be offende
d at my audacity; but who am I, and who are you? We are at such extremes, and I 
am so far removed from you, that I could not offend you if I wished to do so."
   Farther on, in another place, she wrote: "Do not consider my words as the sic
kly ecstasies of a diseased mind, but you are, in my opinion-perfection! I have 
seen you-I see you every day. I do not judge you; I have not weighed you in the 
scales of Reason and found you Perfection-it is simply an article of faith. But 
I must confess one sin against you-I love you. One should not love perfection. O
ne should only look on it as perfection-yet I am in love with you. Though love e
qualizes, do not fear. I have not lowered you to my level, even in my most secre
t thoughts. I have written 'Do not fear,' as if you could fear. I would kiss you
r footprints if I could; but, oh! I am not putting myself on a level with you!-L
ook at the signature-quick, look at the signature!"
   "However, observe" (she wrote in another of the letters), "that although I co
uple you with him, yet I have not once asked you whether you love him. He fell i
n love with you, though he saw you but once. He spoke of you as of 'the light.' 
These are his own words-I heard him use them. But I understood without his sayin
g it that you were all that light is to him. I lived near him for a whole month,
 and I understood then that you, too, must love him.
   I think of you and him as one."
   "What was the matter yesterday?" (she wrote on another sheet). "I passed by y
ou, and you seemed to me to BLUSH. Perhaps it was only my fancy. If I were to br
ing you to the most loathsome den, and show you the revelation of undisguised vi
ce-you should not blush. You can never feel the sense of personal affront. You m
ay hate all who are mean, or base, or unworthy-but not for yourself-only for tho
se whom they wrong. No one can wrong YOU.
   Do you know, I think you ought to love me-for you are the same in my eyes as 
in his-you are as light. An angel cannot hate, perhaps cannot love, either. I of
ten ask myself-is it possible to love everybody? Indeed it is not; it is not in 
nature.
   Abstract love of humanity is nearly always love of self. But you are differen
t. You cannot help loving all, since you can compare with none, and are above al
l personal offence or anger. Oh! how bitter it would be to me to know that you f
elt anger or shame on my account, for that would be your fall-you would become c
omparable at once with such as me.
   "Yesterday, after seeing you, I went home and thought out a picture.
   "Artists always draw the Saviour as an actor in one of the Gospel stories. I 
should do differently. I should represent Christ alone-the disciples did leave H
im alone occasionally. I should paint one little child left with Him. This child
 has been playing about near Him, and had probably just been telling the Saviour
 something in its pretty baby prattle. Christ had listened to it, but was now mu
sing-one hand reposing on the child's bright head.
   His eyes have a far-away expression. Thought, great as the Universe, is in th
em-His face is sad. The little one leans its elbow upon Christ's knee, and with 
its cheek resting on its hand, gazes up at Him, pondering as children sometimes 
do ponder. The sun is setting. There you have my picture.
   "You are innocent-and in your innocence lies all your perfection-oh, remember
 that! What is my passion to you?-you are mine now; I shall be near you all my l
ife-I shall not live long!"
   At length, in the last letter of all, he found:
   "For Heaven's sake, don't misunderstand me! Do not think that I humiliate mys
elf by writing thus to you, or that I belong to that class of people who take a 
satisfaction in humiliating themselves-from pride. I have my consolation, though
 it would be difficult to explain it-but I do not humiliate myself.
   "Why do I wish to unite you two? For your sakes or my own? For my own sake, n
aturally. All the problems of my life would thus be solved; I have thought so fo
r a long time. I know that once when your sister Adelaida saw my portrait she sa
id that such beauty could overthrow the world. But I have renounced the world. Y
ou think it strange that I should say so, for you saw me decked with lace and di
amonds, in the company of drunkards and wastrels. Take no notice of that; I know
 that I have almost ceased to exist. God knows what it is dwelling within me now
-it is not myself. I can see it every day in two dreadful eyes which are always 
looking at me, even when not present. These eyes are silent now, they say nothin
g; but I know their secret. His house is gloomy, and there is a secret in it. I 
am convinced that in some box he has a razor hidden, tied round with silk, just 
like the one that Moscow murderer had. This man also lived with his mother, and 
had a razor hidden away, tied round with white silk, and with this razor he inte
nded to cut a throat.
   "All the while I was in their house I felt sure that somewhere beneath the fl
oor there was hidden away some dreadful corpse, wrapped in oil-cloth, perhaps bu
ried there by his father, who knows? Just as in the Moscow case. I could have sh
own you the very spot!
   "He is always silent, but I know well that he loves me so much that he must h
ate me. My wedding and yours are to be on the same day; so I have arranged with 
him. I have no secrets from him. I would kill him from very fright, but he will 
kill me first. He has just burst out laughing, and says that I am raving. He kno
ws I am writing to you."
   There was much more of this delirious wandering in the letters-one of them wa
s very long.
   At last the prince came out of the dark, gloomy park, in which he had wandere
d about for hours just as yesterday. The bright night seemed to him to be lighte
r than ever. "It must be quite early," he thought. (He had forgotten his watch.)
 There was a sound of distant music somewhere. "Ah," he thought, "the Vauxhall! 
They won't be there today, of course!" At this moment he noticed that he was clo
se to their house; he had felt that he must gravitate to this spot eventually, a
nd, with a beating heart, he mounted the verandah steps.
   No one met him; the verandah was empty, and nearly pitch dark. He opened the 
door into the room, but it, too, was dark and empty.
   He stood in the middle of the room in perplexity. Suddenly the door opened, a
nd in came Alexandra, candle in hand. Seeing the prince she stopped before him i
n surprise, looking at him questioningly.
   It was clear that she had been merely passing through the room from door to d
oor, and had not had the remotest notion that she would meet anyone.
   "How did you come here?" she asked, at last.
   "I-I-came in-"
   "Mamma is not very well, nor is Aglaya. Adelaida has gone to bed, and I am ju
st going. We were alone the whole evening. Father and Prince S. have gone to tow
n."
   "I have come to you-now-to-"
   "Do you know what time it is?"
   "N-no!"
   "Half-past twelve. We are always in bed by one."
   "I-I thought it was half-past nine!"
   "Never mind!" she laughed, "but why didn't you come earlier?
   Perhaps you were expected!"
   "I thought" he stammered, making for the door.
   "Au revoir! I shall amuse them all with this story tomorrow!"
   He walked along the road towards his own house. His heart was beating, his th
oughts were confused, everything around seemed to be part of a dream.
   And suddenly, just as twice already he had awaked from sleep with the same vi
sion, that very apparition now seemed to rise up before him. The woman appeared 
to step out from the park, and stand in the path in front of him, as though she 
had been waiting for him there.
   He shuddered and stopped; she seized his hand and pressed it frenziedly.
   No, this was no apparition!
   There she stood at last, face to face with him, for the first time since thei
r parting.
   She said something, but he looked silently back at her. His heart ached with 
anguish. Oh! never would he banish the recollection of this meeting with her, an
d he never remembered it but with the same pain and agony of mind.
   She went on her knees before him-there in the open road-like a madwoman. He r
etreated a step, but she caught his hand and kissed it, and, just as in his drea
m, the tears were sparkling on her long, beautiful lashes.
   "Get up!" he said, in a frightened whisper, raising her. "Get up at once!"
   "Are you happy-are you happy?" she asked. "Say this one word.
   Are you happy now? Today, this moment? Have you just been with her? What did 
she say?"
   She did not rise from her knees; she would not listen to him; she put her que
stions hurriedly, as though she were pursued.
   "I am going away tomorrow, as you bade me-I won't write-so that this is the l
ast time I shall see you, the last time! This is really the LAST TIME!"
   "Oh, be calm-be calm! Get up!" he entreated, in despair.
   She gazed thirstily at him and clutched his hands.
   "Good-bye!" she said at last, and rose and left him, very quickly.
   The prince noticed that Rogojin had suddenly appeared at her side, and had ta
ken her arm and was leading her away.
   "Wait a minute, prince," shouted the latter, as he went. "I shall be back in 
five minutes."
   He reappeared in five minutes as he had said. The prince was waiting for him.
   "I've put her in the carriage," he said; "it has been waiting round the corne
r there since ten o'clock. She expected that you would be with THEM all the even
ing. I told her exactly what you wrote me. She won't write to the girl any more,
 she promises; and tomorrow she will be off, as you wish. She desired to see you
 for the last time, although you refused, so we've been sitting and waiting on t
hat bench till you should pass on your way home."
   "Did she bring you with her of her own accord?"
   "Of course she did!" said Rogojin, showing his teeth; "and I saw for myself w
hat I knew before. You've read her letters, I suppose?"
   "Did you read them?" asked the prince, struck by the thought.
   "Of course-she showed them to me herself. You are thinking of the razor, eh? 
Ha, ha, ha!"
   "Oh, she is mad!" cried the prince, wringing his hands. "Who knows? Perhaps s
he is not so mad after all," said Rogojin, softly, as though thinking aloud.
   The prince made no reply.
   "Well, good-bye," said Rogojin. "I'm off tomorrow too, you know.
   Remember me kindly! By-the-by," he added, turning round sharply again, "did y
ou answer her question just now? Are you happy, or not?"
   "No, no, no!" cried the prince, with unspeakable sadness.
   "Ha, ha! I never supposed you would say 'yes,'" cried Rogojin, laughing sardo
nically.
   And he disappeared, without looking round again.
      PART IV
      I.
   A WEEK had elapsed since the rendezvous of our two friends on the green bench
 in the park, when, one fine morning at about halfpast ten o'clock, Varvara Arda
lionovna, otherwise Mrs. Ptitsin, who had been out to visit a friend, returned h
ome in a state of considerable mental depression.
   There are certain people of whom it is difficult to say anything which will a
t once throw them into relief-in other words, describe them graphically in their
 typical characteristics. These are they who are generally known as "commonplace
 people," and this class comprises, of course, the immense majority of mankind.
   Authors, as a rule, attempt to select and portray types rarely met with in th
eir entirety, but these types are nevertheless more real than real life itself.
   "Podkoleosin" [A character in Gogol's comedy, The Wedding.] was perhaps an ex
aggeration, but he was by no means a non-existent character; on the contrary, ho
w many intelligent people, after hearing of this Podkoleosin from Gogol, immedia
tely began to find that scores of their friends were exactly like him! They knew
, perhaps, before Gogol told them, that their friends were like Podkoleosin, but
 they did not know what name to give them. In real life, young fellows seldom ju
mp out of the window just before their weddings, because such a feat, not to spe
ak of its other aspects, must be a decidedly unpleasant mode of escape; and yet 
there are plenty of bridegrooms, intelligent fellows too, who would be ready to 
confess themselves Podkoleosins in the depths of their consciousness, just befor
e marriage. Nor does every husband feel bound to repeat at every step, "Tu l'as 
voulu, Georges Dandin!" like another typical personage; and yet how many million
s and billions of Georges Dandins there are in real life who feel inclined to ut
ter this soul-drawn cry after their honeymoon, if not the day after the wedding!
 Therefore, without entering into any more serious examination of the question, 
I will content myself with remarking that in real life typical characters are "w
atered down," so to speak; and all these Dandins and Podkoleosins actually exist
 among us every day, but in a diluted form. I will just add, however, that Georg
es Dandin might have existed exactly as Moliere presented him, and probably does
 exist now and then, though rarely; and so I will end this scientific examinatio
n, which is beginning to look like a newspaper criticism. But for all this, the 
question remains,-what are the novelists to do with commonplace people, and how 
are they to be presented to the reader in such a form as to be in the least degr
ee interesting? They cannot be left out altogether, for commonplace people meet 
one at every turn of life, and to leave them out would be to destroy the whole r
eality and probability of the story. To fill a novel with typical characters onl
y, or with merely strange and uncommon people, would render the book unreal and 
improbable, and would very likely destroy the interest. In my opinion, the duty 
of the novelist is to seek out points of interest and instruction even in the ch
aracters of commonplace people.
   For instance, when the whole essence of an ordinary person's nature lies in h
is perpetual and unchangeable commonplaceness; and when in spite of all his ende
avours to do something out of the common, this person ends, eventually, by remai
ning in his unbroken line of routine-. I think such an individual really does be
come a type of his own-a type of commonplaceness which will not for the world, i
f it can help it, be contented, but strains and yearns to be something original 
and independent, without the slightest possibility of being so. To this class of
 commonplace people belong several characters in this novel;-characters which-I 
admit-I have not drawn very vividly up to now for my reader's benefit.
   Such were, for instance, Varvara Ardalionovna Ptitsin, her husband, and her b
rother, Gania.
   There is nothing so annoying as to be fairly rich, of a fairly good family, p
leasing presence, average education, to be "not stupid," kind-hearted, and yet t
o have no talent at all, no originality, not a single idea of one's own-to be, i
n fact,
   "just like everyone else."
   Of such people there are countless numbers in this world-far more even than a
ppear. They can be divided into two classes as all men can-that is, those of lim
ited intellect, and those who are much cleverer. The former of these classes is 
the happier.
   To a commonplace man of limited intellect, for instance, nothing is simpler t
han to imagine himself an original character, and to revel in that belief withou
t the slightest misgiving.
   Many of our young women have thought fit to cut their hair short, put on blue
 spectacles, and call themselves Nihilists. By doing this they have been able to
 persuade themselves, without further trouble, that they have acquired new convi
ctions of their own.
   Some men have but felt some little qualm of kindness towards their fellow-men
, and the fact has been quite enough to persuade them that they stand alone in t
he van of enlightenment and that no one has such humanitarian feelings as they. 
Others have but to read an idea of somebody else's, and they can immediately ass
imilate it and believe that it was a child of their own brain.
   The "impudence of ignorance," if I may use the expression, is developed to a 
wonderful extent in such cases;-unlikely as it appears, it is met with at every 
turn.
   This confidence of a stupid man in his own talents has been wonderfully depic
ted by Gogol in the amazing character of Pirogoff. Pirogoff has not the slightes
t doubt of his own genius,-nay, of his SUPERIORITY of genius,-so certain is he o
f it that he never questions it. How many Pirogoffs have there not been among ou
r writers-scholars-propagandists? I say "have been," but indeed there are plenty
 of them at this very day.
   Our friend, Gania, belonged to the other class-to the "much cleverer" persons
, though he was from head to foot permeated and saturated with the longing to be
 original. This class, as I have said above, is far less happy. For the "clever 
commonplace" person, though he may possibly imagine himself a man of genius and 
originality, none the less has within his heart the deathless worm of suspicion 
and doubt; and this doubt sometimes brings a clever man to despair. (As a rule, 
however, nothing tragic happens;-his liver becomes a little damaged in the cours
e of time, nothing more serious. Such men do not give up their aspirations after
 originality without a severe struggle,-and there have been men who, though good
 fellows in themselves, and even benefactors to humanity, have sunk to the level
 of base criminals for the sake of originality.
   Gania was a beginner, as it were, upon this road. A deep and unchangeable con
sciousness of his own lack of talent, combined with a vast longing to be able to
 persuade himself that he was original, had rankled in his heart, even from chil
dhood.
   He seemed to have been born with overwrought nerves, and in his passionate de
sire to excel, he was often led to the brink of some rash step; and yet, having 
resolved upon such a step, when the moment arrived, he invariably proved too sen
sible to take it. He was ready, in the same way, to do a base action in order to
 obtain his wished-for object; and yet, when the moment came to do it, he found 
that he was too honest for any great baseness. (Not that he objected to acts of 
petty meanness-he was always ready for THEM.) He looked with hate and loathing o
n the poverty and downfall of his family, and treated his mother with haughty co
ntempt, although he knew that his whole future depended on her character and rep
utation.
   Aglaya had simply frightened him; yet he did not give up all thoughts of her-
though he never seriously hoped that she would condescend to him. At the time of
 his "adventure" with Nastasia Philipovna he had come to the conclusion that mon
ey was his only hope-money should do all for him.
   At the moment when he lost Aglaya, and after the scene with Nastasia, he had 
felt so low in his own eyes that he actually brought the money back to the princ
e. Of this returning of the money given to him by a madwoman who had received it
 from a madman, he had often repented since-though he never ceased to be proud o
f his action. During the short time that Muishkin remained in Petersburg Gania h
ad had time to come to hate him for his sympathy, though the prince told him tha
t it was "not everyone who would have acted so nobly" as to return the money. He
 had long pondered, too, over his relations with Aglaya, and had persuaded himse
lf that with such a strange, childish, innocent character as hers, things might 
have ended very differently.
   Remorse then seized him; he threw up his post, and buried himself in self-tor
ment and reproach.
   He lived at Ptitsin's, and openly showed contempt for the latter, though he a
lways listened to his advice, and was sensible enough to ask for it when he want
ed it. Gavrila Ardalionovitch was angry with Ptitsin because the latter did not 
care to become a Rothschild. "If you are to be a Jew," he said, "do it properly-
squeeze people right and left, show some character; be the King of the Jews whil
e you are about it."
   Ptitsin was quiet and not easily offended-he only laughed. But on one occasio
n he explained seriously to Gania that he was no Jew, that he did nothing dishon
est, that he could not help the market price of money, that, thanks to his accur
ate habits, he had already a good footing and was respected, and that his busine
ss was flourishing.
   "I shan't ever be a Rothschild, and there is no reason why I should," he adde
d, smiling; "but I shall have a house in the Liteynaya, perhaps two, and that wi
ll be enough for me." "Who knows but what I may have three!" he concluded to him
self; but this dream, cherished inwardly, he never confided to a soul.
   Nature loves and favours such people. Ptitsin will certainly have his reward,
 not three houses, but four, precisely because from childhood up he had realized
 that he would never be a Rothschild.
   That will be the limit of Ptitsin's fortune, and, come what may, he will neve
r have more than four houses.
   Varvara Ardalionovna was not like her brother. She too, had passionate desire
s, but they were persistent rather than impetuous. Her plans were as wise as her
 methods of carrying them out. No doubt she also belonged to the category of ord
inary people who dream of being original, but she soon discovered that she had n
ot a grain of true originality, and she did not let it trouble her too much. Per
haps a certain kind of pride came to her help. She made her first concession to 
the demands of practical life with great resolution when she consented to marry 
Ptitsin.
   However, when she married she did not say to herself, "Never mind a mean acti
on if it leads to the end in view," as her brother would certainly have said in 
such a case; it is quite probable that he may have said it when he expressed his
 elder-brotherly satisfaction at her decision. Far from this; Varvara Ardalionov
na did not marry until she felt convinced that her future husband was unassuming
, agreeable, almost cultured, and that nothing on earth would tempt him to a rea
lly dishonourable deed. As to small meannesses, such trifles did not trouble her
. Indeed, who is free from them? It is absurd to expect the ideal! Besides, she 
knew that her marriage would provide a refuge for all her family.
   Seeing Gania unhappy, she was anxious to help him, in spite of their former d
isputes and misunderstandings. Ptitsin, in a friendly way, would press his broth
er-in-law to enter the army.
   "You know," he said sometimes, jokingly, "you despise generals and generaldom
, but you will see that 'they' will all end by being generals in their turn. You
 will see it if you live long enough!"
   "But why should they suppose that I despise generals?" Gania thought sarcasti
cally to himself.
   To serve her brother's interests, Varvara Ardalionovna was constantly at the 
Epanchins' house, helped by the fact that in childhood she and Gania had played 
with General Ivan Fedorovitch's daughters. It would have been inconsistent with 
her character if in these visits she had been pursuing a chimera; her project wa
s not chimerical at all; she was building on a firm basis-on her knowledge of th
e character of the Epanchin family, especially Aglaya, whom she studied closely.
 All Varvara's efforts were directed towards bringing Aglaya and Gania together.
   Perhaps she achieved some result; perhaps, also, she made the mistake of depe
nding too much upon her brother, and expecting more from him than he would ever 
be capable of giving. However this may be, her manoeuvres were skilful enough. F
or weeks at a time she would never mention Gania. Her attitude was modest but di
gnified, and she was always extremely truthful and sincere.
   Examining the depths of her conscience, she found nothing to reproach herself
 with, and this still further strengthened her in her designs. But Varvara Ardal
ionovna sometimes remarked that she felt spiteful; that there was a good deal of
 vanity in her, perhaps even of wounded vanity. She noticed this at certain time
s more than at others, and especially after her visits to the Epanchins.
   Today, as I have said, she returned from their house with a heavy feeling of 
dejection. There was a sensation of bitterness, a sort of mocking contempt, ming
led with it.
   Arrived at her own house, Varia heard a considerable commotion going on in th
e upper storey, and distinguished the voices of her father and brother. On enter
ing the salon she found Gania pacing up and down at frantic speed, pale with rag
e and almost tearing his hair. She frowned, and subsided on to the sofa with a t
ired air, and without taking the trouble to remove her hat. She very well knew t
hat if she kept quiet and asked her brother nothing about his reason for tearing
 up and down the room, his wrath would fall upon her head. So she hastened to pu
t the question:
   "The old story, eh?"
   "Old story? No! Heaven knows what's up now-I don't! Father has simply gone ma
d; mother's in floods of tears. Upon my word, Varia, I must kick him out of the 
house; or else go myself," he added, probably remembering that he could not well
 turn people out of a house which was not his own.
   "You must make allowances," murmured Varia.
   "Make allowances? For whom? Him-the old blackguard? No, no, Varia-that won't 
do! It won't do, I tell you! And look at the swagger of the man! He's all to bla
me himself, and yet he puts on so much 'side' that you'd think-my word!-'It's to
o much trouble to go through the gate, you must break the fence for me!'
   That's the sort of air he puts on; but what's the matter with you, Varia? Wha
t a curious expression you have!"
   "I'm all right," said Varia, in a tone that sounded as though she were all wr
ong.
   Gania looked more intently at her.
   "You've been THERE?" he asked, suddenly.
   "Yes."
   "Did you find out anything?"
   "Nothing unexpected. I discovered that it's all true. My husband was wiser th
an either of us. Just as he suspected from the beginning, so it has fallen out. 
Where is he?"
   "Out. Well-what has happened?-go on."
   "The prince is formally engaged to her-that's settled. The elder sisters told
 me about it. Aglaya has agreed. They don't attempt to conceal it any longer; yo
u know how mysterious and secret they have all been up to now. Adelaida's weddin
g is put off again, so that both can be married on one day. Isn't that delightfu
lly romantic? Somebody ought to write a poem on it. Sit down and write an ode in
stead of tearing up and down like that. This evening Princess Bielokonski is to 
arrive; she comes just in time-they have a party tonight. He is to be presented 
to old Bielokonski, though I believe he knows her already; probably the engageme
nt will be openly announced. They are only afraid that he may knock something do
wn, or trip over something when he comes into the room. It would be just like hi
m."
   Gania listened attentively, but to his sister's astonishment he was by no mea
ns so impressed by this news (which should, she thought, have been so important 
to him) as she had expected.
   "Well, it was clear enough all along," he said, after a moment's reflection. 
"So that's the end," he added, with a disagreeable smile, continuing to walk up 
and down the room, but much slower than before, and glancing slyly into his sist
er's face.
   "It's a good thing that you take it philosophically, at all events," said Var
ia. "I'm really very glad of it."
   "Yes, it's off our hands-off YOURS, I should say."
   "I think I have served you faithfully. I never even asked you what happiness 
you expected to find with Aglaya."
   "Did I ever expect to find happiness with Aglaya?"
   "Come, come, don't overdo your philosophy. Of course you did. Now it's all ov
er, and a good thing, too; pair of fools that we have been! I confess I have nev
er been able to look at it seriously. I busied myself in it for your sake, think
ing that there was no knowing what might happen with a funny girl like that to d
eal with. There were ninety to one chances against it. To this moment I can't ma
ke out why you wished for it."
   "H'm! now, I suppose, you and your husband will never weary of egging me on t
o work again. You'll begin your lectures about perseverance and strength of will
, and all that. I know it all by heart," said Gania, laughing.
   "He's got some new idea in his head," thought Varia. "Are they pleased over t
here-the parents?" asked Gania, suddenly.
   "N-no, I don't think they are. You can judge for yourself. I think the genera
l is pleased enough; her mother is a little uneasy. She always loathed the idea 
of the prince as a HUSBAND; everybody knows that."
   "Of course, naturally. The bridegroom is an impossible and ridiculous one. I 
mean, has SHE given her formal consent?"
   "She has not said 'no,' up to now, and that's all. It was sure to be so with 
her. You know what she is like. You know how absurdly shy she is. You remember h
ow she used to hide in a cupboard as a child, so as to avoid seeing visitors, fo
r hours at a time. She is just the same now; but, do you know, I think there is 
something serious in the matter, even from her side; I feel it, somehow. She lau
ghs at the prince, they say, from morn to night in order to hide her real feelin
gs; but you may be sure she finds occasion to say something or other to him on t
he sly, for he himself is in a state of radiant happiness. He walks in the cloud
s; they say he is extremely funny just now; I heard it from themselves. They see
med to be laughing at me in their sleeves-those elder girls-I don't know why."
   Gania had begun to frown, and probably Varia added this last sentence in orde
r to probe his thought. However, at this moment, the noise began again upstairs.
   "I'll turn him out!" shouted Gania, glad of the opportunity of venting his ve
xation. "I shall just turn him out-we can't have this."
   "Yes, and then he'll go about the place and disgrace us as he did yesterday."
   "How 'as he did yesterday'? What do you mean? What did he do yesterday?" aske
d Gania, in alarm.
   "Why, goodness me, don't you know?" Varia stopped short.
   "What? You don't mean to say that he went there yesterday!" cried Gania, flus
hing red with shame and anger. "Good heavens, Varia!
   Speak! You have just been there. WAS he there or not, QUICK?" And Gania rushe
d for the door. Varia followed and caught him by both hands.
   "What are you doing? Where are you going to? You can't let him go now; if you
 do he'll go and do something worse."
   "What did he do there? What did he say?" "They couldn't tell me themselves; t
hey couldn't make head or tail of it; but he frightened them all. He came to see
 the general, who was not at home; so he asked for Lizabetha Prokofievna. First 
of all, he begged her for some place, or situation, for work of some kind, and t
hen he began to complain about US, about me and my husband, and you, especially 
YOU; he said a lot of things."
   "Oh! couldn't you find out?" muttered Gania, trembling hysterically.
   "No-nothing more than that. Why, they couldn't understand him themselves; and
 very likely didn't tell me all."
   Gania seized his head with both hands and tottered to the window;
   Varia sat down at the other window.
   "Funny girl, Aglaya," she observed, after a pause. "When she left me she said
, 'Give my special and personal respects to your parents; I shall certainly find
 an opportunity to see your father one day,' and so serious over it. She's a str
ange creature."
   "Wasn't she joking? She was speaking sarcastically!" "Not a bit of it; that's
 just the strange part of it."
   "Does she know about father, do you think-or not?"
   "That they do NOT know about it in the house is quite certain, the rest of th
em, I mean; but you have given me an idea. Aglaya perhaps knows. She alone, thou
gh, if anyone; for the sisters were as astonished as I was to hear her speak so 
seriously. If she knows, the prince must have told her."
   "Oh! it's not a great matter to guess who told her. A thief! A thief in our f
amily, and the head of the family, too!"
   "Oh! nonsense!" cried Varia, angrily. "That was nothing but a drunkard's tale
. Nonsense! Why, who invented the whole thing-Lebedeff and the prince-a pretty p
air! Both were probably drunk."
   "Father is a drunkard and a thief; I am a beggar, and the husband of my siste
r is a usurer," continued Gania, bitterly. "There was a pretty list of advantage
s with which to enchant the heart of Aglaya."
   "That same husband of your sister, the usurer-"
   "Feeds me? Go on. Don't stand on ceremony, pray."
   "Don't lose your temper. You are just like a schoolboy. You think that all th
is sort of thing would harm you in Aglaya's eyes, do you? You little know her ch
aracter. She is capable of refusing the most brilliant party, and running away a
nd starving in a garret with some wretched student; that's the sort of girl she 
is. You never could or did understand how interesting you would have seen in her
 eyes if you had come firmly and proudly through our misfortunes. The prince has
 simply caught her with hook and line; firstly, because he never thought of fish
ing for her, and secondly, because he is an idiot in the eyes of most people. It
's quite enough for her that by accepting him she puts her family out and annoys
 them all round-that's what she likes. You don't understand these things."
   "We shall see whether I understand or no!" said Gania, enigmatically. "But I 
shouldn't like her to know all about father, all the same. I thought the prince 
would manage to hold his tongue about this, at least. He prevented Lebedeff spre
ading the news-he wouldn't even tell me all when I asked him-"
   "Then you must see that he is not responsible. What does it matter to you now
, in any case? What are you hoping for still? If you HAVE a hope left, it is tha
t your suffering air may soften her heart towards you."
   "Oh, she would funk a scandal like anyone else. You are all tarred with one b
rush!"
   "What! AGLAYA would have funked? You are a chicken-hearted fellow, Gania!" sa
id Varia, looking at her brother with contempt.
   "Not one of us is worth much. Aglaya may be a wild sort of a girl, but she is
 far nobler than any of us, a thousand times nobler!"
   "Well-come! there's nothing to get cross about," said Gania.
   "All I'm afraid of is-mother. I'm afraid this scandal about father may come t
o her ears; perhaps it has already. I am dreadfully afraid."
   "It undoubtedly has already!" observed Gania.
   Varia had risen from her place and had started to go upstairs to her mother; 
but at this observation of Gania's she turned and gazed at him attentively.
   "Who could have told her?"
   "Hippolyte, probably. He would think it the most delightful amusement in the 
world to tell her of it the instant he moved over here; I haven't a doubt of it.
"
   "But how could he know anything of it? Tell me that. Lebedeff and the prince 
determined to tell no one-even Colia knows nothing."
   "What, Hippolyte? He found it out himself, of course. Why, you have no idea w
hat a cunning little animal he is; dirty little gossip! He has the most extraord
inary nose for smelling out other people's secrets, or anything approaching to s
candal. Believe it or not, but I'm pretty sure he has got round Aglaya. If he ha
sn't, he soon will. Rogojin is intimate with him, too. How the prince doesn't no
tice it, I can't understand. The little wretch considers me his enemy now and do
es his best to catch me tripping. What on earth does it matter to him, when he's
 dying?
   However, you'll see; I shall catch HIM tripping yet, and not he me."
   "Why did you get him over here, if you hate him so? And is it really worth yo
ur while to try to score off him?"
   "Why, it was yourself who advised me to bring him over!"
   "I thought he might be useful. You know he is in love with Aglaya himself, no
w, and has written to her; he has even written to Lizabetha Prokofievna!"
   "Oh! he's not dangerous there!" cried Gania, laughing angrily.
   "However, I believe there is something of that sort in the air; he is very li
kely to be in love, for he is a mere boy. But he won't write anonymous letters t
o the old lady; that would be too audacious a thing for him to attempt; but I da
re swear the very first thing he did was to show me up to Aglaya as a base decei
ver and intriguer. I confess I was fool enough to attempt something through him 
at first. I thought he would throw himself into my service out of revengeful fee
lings towards the prince, the sly little beast! But I know him better now. As fo
r the theft, he may have heard of it from the widow in Petersburg, for if the ol
d man committed himself to such an act, he can have done it for no other object 
but to give the money to her. Hippolyte said to me, without any prelude, that th
e general had promised the widow four hundred roubles. Of course I understood, a
nd the little wretch looked at me with a nasty sort of satisfaction. I know him;
 you may depend upon it he went and told mother too, for the pleasure of woundin
g her. And why doesn't he die, I should like to know?
   He undertook to die within three weeks, and here he is getting fatter. His co
ugh is better, too. It was only yesterday that he said that was the second day h
e hadn't coughed blood."
   "Well, turn him out!"
   "I don't HATE, I despise him," said Gania, grandly. "Well, I do hate him, if 
you like!" he added, with a sudden access of rage,
   "and I'll tell him so to his face, even when he's dying! If you had but read 
his confession-good Lord! what refinement of impudence! Oh, but I'd have liked t
o whip him then and there, like a schoolboy, just to see how surprised he would 
have been!
   Now he hates everybody because he-Oh, I say, what on earth are they doing the
re! Listen to that noise! I really can't stand this any longer. Ptitsin!" he cri
ed, as the latter entered the room,
   "what in the name of goodness are we coming to? Listen to that-"
   But the noise came rapidly nearer, the door burst open, and old General Ivolg
in, raging, furious, purple-faced, and trembling with anger, rushed in. He was f
ollowed by Nina Alexandrovna, Colia, and behind the rest, Hippolyte.
      II.
   HIPPOLYTE had now been five days at the Ptitsins'. His flitting from the prin
ce's to these new quarters had been brought about quite naturally and without ma
ny words. He did not quarrel with the prince-in fact, they seemed to part as fri
ends. Gania, who had been hostile enough on that eventful evening, had himself c
ome to see him a couple of days later, probably in obedience to some sudden impu
lse. For some reason or other, Rogojin too had begun to visit the sick boy. The 
prince thought it might be better for him to move away from his (the prince's) h
ouse.
   Hippolyte informed him, as he took his leave, that Ptitsin "had been kind eno
ugh to offer him a corner," and did not say a word about Gania, though Gania had
 procured his invitation, and himself came to fetch him away. Gania noticed this
 at the time, and put it to Hippolyte's debit on account.
   Gania was right when he told his sister that Hippolyte was getting better; th
at he was better was clear at the first glance.
   He entered the room now last of all, deliberately, and with a disagreeable sm
ile on his lips.
   Nina Alexandrovna came in, looking frightened. She had changed much since we 
last saw her, half a year ago, and had grown thin and pale. Colia looked worried
 and perplexed. He could not understand the vagaries of the general, and knew no
thing of the last achievement of that worthy, which had caused so much commotion
 in the house. But he could see that his father had of late changed very much, a
nd that he had begun to behave in so extraordinary a fashion both at home and ab
road that he was not like the same man. What perplexed and disturbed him as much
 as anything was that his father had entirely given up drinking during the last 
few days. Colia knew that he had quarrelled with both Lebedeff and the prince, a
nd had just bought a small bottle of vodka and brought it home for his father.
   "Really, mother," he had assured Nina Alexandrovna upstairs,
   "really you had better let him drink. He has not had a drop for three days; h
e must be suffering agonies-The general now entered the room, threw the door wid
e open, and stood on the threshold trembling with indignation.
   "Look here, my dear sir," he began, addressing Ptitsin in a very loud tone of
 voice; "if you have really made up your mind to sacrifice an old man-your fathe
r too or at all events father of your wife-an old man who has served his emperor
-to a wretched little atheist like this, all I can say is, sir, my foot shall ce
ase to tread your floors. Make your choice, sir; make your choice quickly, if yo
u please! Me or this-screw! Yes, screw, sir; I said it accidentally, but let the
 word stand-this screw, for he screws and drills himself into my soul-"
   "Hadn't you better say corkscrew?" said Hippolyte.
   "No, sir, NOT corkscrew. I am a general, not a bottle, sir. Make your choice,
 sir-me or him."
   Here Colia handed him a chair, and he subsided into it, breathless with rage.
   "Hadn't you better-better-take a nap?" murmured the stupefied Ptitsin.
   "A nap?" shrieked the general. "I am not drunk, sir; you insult me! I see," h
e continued, rising, "I see that all are against me here. Enough-I go; but know,
 sirs-know that-"
   He was not allowed to finish his sentence. Somebody pushed him back into his 
chair, and begged him to be calm. Nina Alexandrovna trembled, and cried quietly.
 Gania retired to the window in disgust.
   "But what have I done? What is his grievance?" asked Hippolyte, grinning.
   "What have you done, indeed?" put in Nina Alexandrovna. "You ought to be asha
med of yourself, teasing an old man like that-and in your position, too."
   "And pray what IS my position, madame? I have the greatest respect for you, p
ersonally; but-"
   "He's a little screw," cried the general; "he drills holes my heart and soul.
 He wishes me to be a pervert to atheism. Know, you young greenhorn, that I was 
covered with honours before ever you were born; and you are nothing better than 
a wretched little worm, torn in two with coughing, and dying slowly of your own 
malice and unbelief. What did Gavrila bring you over here for?
   They're all against me, even to my own son-all against me."
   "Oh, come-nonsense!" cried Gania; "if you did not go shaming us all over the 
town, things might be better for all parties."
   "What-shame you? I?-what do you mean, you young calf? I shame you? I can only
 do you honour, sir; I cannot shame you."
   He jumped up from his chair in a fit of uncontrollable rage.
   Gania was very angry too.
   "Honour, indeed!" said the latter, with contempt.
   "What do you say, sir?" growled the general, taking a step towards him.
   "I say that I have but to open my mouth, and you-"
   Gania began, but did not finish. The two-father and son-stood before one anot
her, both unspeakably agitated, especially Gania.
   "Gania, Gania, reflect!" cried his mother, hurriedly.
   "It's all nonsense on both sides," snapped out Varia. "Let them alone, mother
."
   "It's only for mother's sake that I spare him," said Gania, tragically.
   "Speak!" said the general, beside himself with rage and excitement; "speak-un
der the penalty of a father's curse "Oh, father's curse be hanged-you don't frig
hten me that way!" said Gania. "Whose fault is it that you have been as mad as a
 March hare all this week? It is just a week-you see, I count the days. Take car
e now; don't provoke me too much, or I'll tell all.
   Why did you go to the Epanchins' yesterday-tell me that? And you call yoursel
f an old man, too, with grey hair, and father of a family! H'm-nice sort of a fa
ther."
   "Be quiet, Gania," cried Colia. "Shut up, you fool!"
   "Yes, but how have I offended him?" repeated Hippolyte, still in the same jee
ring voice. " Why does he call me a screw? You all heard it. He came to me himse
lf and began telling me about some Captain Eropegoff. I don't wish for your comp
any, general. I always avoided you-you know that. What have I to do with Captain
 Eropegoff? All I did was to express my opinion that probably Captain Eropegoff 
never existed at all!"
   "Of course he never existed!" Gania interrupted.
   But the general only stood stupefied and gazed around in a dazed way. Gania's
 speech had impressed him, with its terrible candour.
   For the first moment or two he could find no words to answer him, and it was 
only when Hippolyte burst out laughing, and said:
   "There, you see! Even your own son supports my statement that there never was
 such a person as Captain Eropegoff!" that the old fellow muttered confusedly:
   "Kapiton Eropegoff-not Captain Eropegoff!-Kapiton-major retired-Eropegoff-Kap
iton."
   "Kapiton didn't exist either!" persisted Gania, maliciously.
   "What? Didn't exist?" cried the poor general, and a deep blush suffused his f
ace.
   "That'll do, Gania!" cried Varia and Ptitsin.
   "Shut up, Gania!" said Colia.
   But this intercession seemed to rekindle the general.
   "What did you mean, sir, that he didn't exist? Explain yourself," he repeated
, angrily.
   "Because he DIDN'T exist-never could and never did-there! You'd better drop t
he subject, I warn you!"
   "And this is my son-my own son-whom I-oh, gracious Heaven!
   Eropegoff-Eroshka Eropegoff didn't exist!"
   "Ha, ha! it's Eroshka now," laughed Hippolyte.
   "No, sir, Kapitoshka-not Eroshka. I mean, Kapiton Alexeyevitch-retired major-
married Maria Petrovna Lu-Lu-he was my friend and companion-Lutugoff-from our ea
rliest beginnings. I closed his eyes for him-he was killed. Kapiton Eropegoff ne
ver existed! tfu!"
   The general shouted in his fury; but it was to be concluded that his wrath wa
s not kindled by the expressed doubt as to Kapiton's existence. This was his sca
pegoat; but his excitement was caused by something quite different. As a rule he
 would have merely shouted down the doubt as to Kapiton, told a long yarn about 
his friend, and eventually retired upstairs to his room. But today, in the stran
ge uncertainty of human nature, it seemed to require but so small an offence as 
this to make his cup to overflow. The old man grew purple in the face, he raised
 his hands. "Enough of this!" he yelled. "My curse-away, out of the house I go! 
Colia, bring my bag away!" He left the room hastily and in a paroxysm of rage.
   His wife, Colia, and Ptitsin ran out after him.
   "What have you done now?" said Varia to Gania. "He'll probably be making off 
THERE again! What a disgrace it all is!"
   "Well, he shouldn't steal," cried Gania, panting with fury. And just at this 
moment his eye met Hippolyte's.
   "As for you, sir," he cried, "you should at least remember that you are in a 
strange house and-receiving hospitality; you should not take the opportunity of 
tormenting an old man, sir, who is too evidently out of his mind."
   Hippolyte looked furious, but he restrained himself.
   "I don't quite agree with you that your father is out of his mind," he observ
ed, quietly. "On the contrary, I cannot help thinking he has been less demented 
of late. Don't you think so?
   He has grown so cunning and careful, and weighs his words so deliberately; he
 spoke to me about that Kapiton fellow with an object, you know! Just fancy-he w
anted me to-"
   "Oh, devil take what he wanted you to do! Don't try to be too cunning with me
, young man!" shouted Gania. "If you are aware of the real reason for my father'
s present condition (and you have kept such an excellent spying watch during the
se last few days that you are sure to be aware of it)-you had no right whatever 
to torment the-unfortunate man, and to worry my mother by your exaggerations of 
the affair; because the whole business is nonsense-simply a drunken freak, and n
othing more, quite unproved by any evidence, and I don't believe that much of it
!" (he snapped his fingers). "But you must needs spy and watch over us all, beca
use you are a-a-"
   "Screw!" laughed Hippolyte.
   "Because you are a humbug, sir; and thought fit to worry people for half an h
our, and tried to frighten them into believing that you would shoot yourself wit
h your little empty pistol, pirouetting about and playing at suicide! I gave you
 hospitality, you have fattened on it, your cough has left you, and you repay al
l this-"
   "Excuse me-two words! I am Varvara Ardalionovna's guest, not yours; YOU have 
extended no hospitality to me. On the contrary, if I am not mistaken, I believe 
you are yourself indebted to Mr.
   Ptitsin's hospitality. Four days ago I begged my mother to come down here and
 find lodgings, because I certainly do feel better here, though I am not fat, no
r have I ceased to cough. I am today informed that my room is ready for me; ther
efore, having thanked your sister and mother for their kindness to me, I intend 
to leave the house this evening. I beg your pardon-I interrupted you-I think you
 were about to add something?"
   "Oh-if that is the state of affairs-" began Gania.
   "Excuse me-I will take a seat," interrupted Hippolyte once more, sitting down
 deliberately; "for I am not strong yet. Now then, I am ready to hear you. Espec
ially as this is the last chance we shall have of a talk, and very likely the la
st meeting we shall ever have at all."
   Gania felt a little guilty.
   "I assure you I did not mean to reckon up debits and credits," he began, "and
 if you-"
   "I don't understand your condescension," said Hippolyte. "As for me, I promis
ed myself, on the first day of my arrival in this house, that I would have the s
atisfaction of settling accounts with you in a very thorough manner before I sai
d good-bye to you.
   I intend to perform this operation now, if you like; after you, though, of co
urse."
   "May I ask you to be so good as to leave this room?"
   "You'd better speak out. You'll be sorry afterwards if you don't."
   "Hippolyte, stop, please! It's so dreadfully undignified," said Varia.
   "Well, only for the sake of a lady," said Hippolyte, laughing. "I am ready to
 put off the reckoning, but only put it off, Varvara Ardalionovna, because an ex
planation between your brother and myself has become an absolute necessity, and 
I could not think of leaving the house without clearing up all misunderstandings
 first."
   "In a word, you are a wretched little scandal-monger," cried Gania, "and you 
cannot go away without a scandal!"
   "You see," said Hippolyte, coolly, " you can't restrain yourself.
   You'll be dreadfully sorry afterwards if you don't speak out now.
   Come, you shall have the first say. I'll wait."
   Gania was silent and merely looked contemptuously at him.
   "You won't? Very well. I shall be as short as possible, for my part. Two or t
hree times to-day I have had the word 'hospitality' pushed down my throat; this 
is not fair. In inviting me here you yourself entrapped me for your own use; you
 thought I wished to revenge myself upon the prince. You heard that Aglaya Ivano
vna had been kind to me and read my confession. Making sure that I should give m
yself up to your interests, you hoped that you might get some assistance out of 
me. I will not go into details. I don't ask either admission or confirmation of 
this from yourself;
   I am quite content to leave you to your conscience, and to feel that we under
stand one another capitally."
   "What a history you are weaving out of the most ordinary circumstances!" crie
d Varia.
   "I told you the fellow was nothing but a scandalmonger," said Gania.
   "Excuse me, Varia Ardalionovna, I will proceed. I can, of course, neither lov
e nor respect the prince, though he is a good-hearted fellow, if a little queer.
 But there is no need whatever for me to hate him. I quite understood your broth
er when he first offered me aid against the prince, though I did not show it; I 
knew well that your brother was making a ridiculous mistake in me. I am ready to
 spare him, however, even now; but solely out of respect for yourself, Varvara A
rdalionovna.
   "Having now shown you that I am not quite such a fool as I look, and that I h
ave to be fished for with a rod and line for a good long while before I am caugh
t, I will proceed to explain why I specially wished to make your brother look a 
fool. That my motive power is hate, I do not attempt to conceal. I have felt tha
t before dying (and I am dying, however much fatter I may appear to you), I must
 absolutely make a fool of, at least, one of that class of men which has dogged 
me all my life, which I hate so cordially, and which is so prominently represent
ed by your much esteemed brother. I should not enjoy paradise nearly so much wit
hout having done this first. I hate you, Gavrila Ardalionovitch, solely (this ma
y seem curious to you, but I repeat)-solely because you are the type, and incarn
ation, and head, and crown of the most impudent, the most self-satisfied, the mo
st vulgar and detestable form of commonplaceness. You are ordinary of the ordina
ry; you have no chance of ever fathering the pettiest idea of your own. And yet 
you are as jealous and conceited as you can possibly be; you consider yourself a
 great genius; of this you are persuaded, although there are dark moments of dou
bt and rage, when even this fact seems uncertain.
   There are spots of darkness on your horizon, though they will disappear when 
you become completely stupid. But a long and chequered path lies before you, and
 of this I am glad. In the first place you will never gain a certain person."
   "Come, come! This is intolerable! You had better stop, you little mischief-ma
king wretch!" cried Varia. Gania had grown very pale; he trembled, but said noth
ing.
   Hippolyte paused, and looked at him intently and with great gratification. He
 then turned his gaze upon Varia, bowed, and went out, without adding another wo
rd.
   Gania might justly complain of the hardness with which fate treated him. Vari
a dared not speak to him for a long while, as he strode past her, backwards and 
forwards. At last he went and stood at the window, looking out, with his back tu
rned towards her. There was a fearful row going on upstairs again.
   "Are you off?" said Gania, suddenly, remarking that she had risen and was abo
ut to leave the room. "Wait a moment-look at this."
   He approached the table and laid a small sheet of paper before her. It looked
 like a little note.
   "Good heavens!" cried Varia, raising her hands.
   This was the note:
   "GAVRILA ARDOLIONOVITCH,-persuaded of your kindness of heart, I have determin
ed to ask your advice on a matter of great importance to myself. I should like t
o meet you tomorrow morning at seven o'clock by the green bench in the park. It 
is not far from our house. Varvara Ardalionovna, who must accompany you, knows t
he place well.
         "A. E."
   "What on earth is one to make of a girl like that?" said Varia.
   Gania, little as he felt inclined for swagger at this moment, could not avoid
 showing his triumph, especially just after such humiliating remarks as those of
 Hippolyte. A smile of selfsatisfaction beamed on his face, and Varia too was br
imming over with delight.
   "And this is the very day that they were to announce the engagement! What wil
l she do next?"
   "What do you suppose she wants to talk about tomorrow?" asked Gania.
   "Oh, THAT'S all the same! The chief thing is that she wants to see you after 
six months' absence. Look here, Gania, this is a SERIOUS business. Don't swagger
 again and lose the game-play carefully, but don't funk, do you understand? As i
f she could possibly avoid seeing what I have been working for all this last six
 months! And just imagine, I was there this morning and not a word of this! I wa
s there, you know, on the sly. The old lady did not know, or she would have kick
ed me out. I ran some risk for you, you see. I did so want to find out, at all h
azards."
   Here there was a frantic noise upstairs once more; several people seemed to b
e rushing downstairs at once.
   "Now, Gania," cried Varia, frightened, "we can't let him go out!
   We can't afford to have a breath of scandal about the town at this moment. Ru
n after him and beg his pardon-quick."
   But the father of the family was out in the road already. Colia was carrying 
his bag for him; Nina Alexandrovna stood and cried on the doorstep; she wanted t
o run after the general, but Ptitsin kept her back.
   "You will only excite him more," he said. "He has nowhere else to go to-he'll
 be back here in half an hour. I've talked it all over with Colia; let him play 
the fool a bit, it will do him good."
   "What are you up to? Where are you off to? You've nowhere to go to, you know,
" cried Gania, out of the window.
   "Come back, father; the neighbours will hear!" cried Varia.
   The general stopped, turned round, raised his hands and remarked:
   "My curse be upon this house!"
   "Which observation should always be made in as theatrical a tone as possible,
" muttered Gania, shutting the window with a bang.
   The neighbours undoubtedly did hear. Varia rushed out of the room.
   No sooner had his sister left him alone, than Gania took the note out of his 
pocket, kissed it, and pirouetted around.
      III.
   As a general rule, old General Ivolgin's paroxysms ended in smoke. He had bef
ore this experienced fits of sudden fury, but not very often, because he was rea
lly a man of peaceful and kindly disposition. He had tried hundreds of times to 
overcome the dissolute habits which he had contracted of late years. He would su
ddenly remember that he was "a father," would be reconciled with his wife, and s
hed genuine tears. His feeling for Nina Alexandrovna amounted almost to adoratio
n; she had pardoned so much in silence, and loved him still in spite of the stat
e of degradation into which he had fallen. But the general's struggles with his 
own weakness never lasted very long. He was, in his way, an impetuous man, and a
 quiet life of repentance in the bosom of his family soon became insupportable t
o him. In the end he rebelled, and flew into rages which he regretted, perhaps, 
even as he gave way to them, but which were beyond his control. He picked quarre
ls with everyone, began to hold forth eloquently, exacted unlimited respect, and
 at last disappeared from the house, and sometimes did not return for a long tim
e. He had given up interfering in the affairs of his family for two years now, a
nd knew nothing about them but what he gathered from hearsay.
   But on this occasion there was something more serious than usual.
   Everyone seemed to know something, but to be afraid to talk about it.
   The general had turned up in the bosom of his family two or three days before
, but not, as usual, with the olive branch of peace in his hand, not in the garb
 of penitence-in which he was usually clad on such occasions-but, on the contrar
y, in an uncommonly bad temper. He had arrived in a quarrelsome mood, pitching i
nto everyone he came across, and talking about all sorts and kinds of subjects i
n the most unexpected manner, so that it was impossible to discover what it was 
that was really putting him out. At moments he would be apparently quite bright 
and happy; but as a rule he would sit moody and thoughtful. He would abruptly co
mmence to hold forth about the Epanchins, about Lebedeff, or the prince, and equ
ally abruptly would stop short and refuse to speak another word, answering all f
urther questions with a stupid smile, unconscious that he was smiling, or that h
e had been asked a question. The whole of the previous night he had spent tossin
g about and groaning, and poor Nina Alexandrovna had been busy making cold compr
esses and warm fomentations and so on, without being very clear how to apply the
m. He had fallen asleep after a while, but not for long, and had awaked in a sta
te of violent hypochondria which had ended in his quarrel with Hippolyte, and th
e solemn cursing of Ptitsin's establishment generally. It was also observed duri
ng those two or three days that he was in a state of morbid self-esteem, and was
 specially touchy on all points of honour. Colia insisted, in discussing the mat
ter with his mother, that all this was but the outcome of abstinence from drink,
 or perhaps of pining after Lebedeff, with whom up to this time the general had 
been upon terms of the greatest friendship; but with whom, for some reason or ot
her, he had quarrelled a few days since, parting from him in great wrath. There 
had also been a scene with the prince. Colia had asked an explanation of the lat
ter, but had been forced to conclude that he was not told the whole truth.
   If Hippolyte and Nina Alexandrovna had, as Gania suspected, had some special 
conversation about the general's actions, it was strange that the malicious yout
h, whom Gania had called a scandal-monger to his face, had not allowed himself a
 similar satisfaction with Colia.
   The fact is that probably Hippolyte was not quite so black as Gania painted h
im; and it was hardly likely that he had informed Nina Alexandrovna of certain e
vents, of which we know, for the mere pleasure of giving her pain. We must never
 forget that human motives are generally far more complicated than we are apt to
 suppose, and that we can very rarely accurately describe the motives of another
. It is much better for the writer, as a rule, to content himself with the bare 
statement of events; and we shall take this line with regard to the catastrophe 
recorded above, and shall state the remaining events connected with the general'
s trouble shortly, because we feel that we have already given to this secondary 
character in our story more attention than we originally intended.
   The course of events had marched in the following order. When Lebedeff return
ed, in company with the general, after their expedition to town a few days since
, for the purpose of investigation, he brought the prince no information whateve
r. If the latter had not himself been occupied with other thoughts and impressio
ns at the time, he must have observed that Lebedeff not only was very uncommunic
ative, but even appeared anxious to avoid him.
   When the prince did give the matter a little attention, he recalled the fact 
that during these days he had always found Lebedeff to be in radiantly good spir
its, when they happened to meet; and further, that the general and Lebedeff were
 always together. The two friends did not seem ever to be parted for a moment.
   Occasionally the prince heard loud talking and laughing upstairs, and once he
 detected the sound of a jolly soldier's song going on above, and recognized the
 unmistakable bass of the general's voice. But the sudden outbreak of song did n
ot last; and for an hour afterwards the animated sound of apparently drunken con
versation continued to be heard from above. At length there was the clearest evi
dence of a grand mutual embracing, and someone burst into tears. Shortly after t
his, however, there was a violent but short-lived quarrel, with loud talking on 
both sides.
   All these days Colia had been in a state of great mental preoccupation. Muish
kin was usually out all day, and only came home late at night. On his return he 
was invariably informed that Colia had been looking for him. However, when they 
did meet, Colia never had anything particular to tell him, excepting that he was
 highly dissatisfied with the general and his present condition of mind and beha
viour.
   "They drag each other about the place," he said, and get drunk together at th
e pub close by here, and quarrel in the street on the way home, and embrace one 
another after it, and don't seem to part for a moment."
   When the prince pointed out that there was nothing new about that, for that t
hey had always behaved in this manner together, Colia did not know what to say; 
in fact he could not explain what it was that specially worried him, just now, a
bout his father.
   On the morning following the bacchanalian songs and quarrels recorded above, 
as the prince stepped out of the house at about eleven o'clock, the general sudd
enly appeared before him, much agitated.
   "I have long sought the honour and opportunity of meeting you-much-esteemed L
ef Nicolaievitch," he murmured, pressing the prince's hand very hard, almost pai
nfully so; "long-very long."
   The prince begged him to step in and sit down.
   "No-I will not sit down,-I am keeping you, I see,-another time!-I think I may
 be permitted to congratulate you upon the realization of your heart's best wish
es, is it not so?"
   "What best wishes?"
   The prince blushed. He thought, as so many in his position do, that nobody ha
d seen, heard, noticed, or understood anything.
   "Oh-be easy, sir, be easy! I shall not wound your tenderest feelings. I've be
en through it all myself, and I know well how unpleasant it is when an outsider 
sticks his nose in where he is not wanted. I experience this every morning. I ca
me to speak to you about another matter, though, an important matter. A very imp
ortant matter, prince."
   The latter requested him to take a seat once more, and sat down himself.
   "Well-just for one second, then. The fact is, I came for advice.
   Of course I live now without any very practical objects in life; but, being f
ull of self-respect, in which quality the ordinary Russian is so deficient as a 
rule, and of activity, I am desirous, in a word, prince, of placing myself and m
y wife and children in a position of-in fact, I want advice."
   The prince commended his aspirations with warmth.
   "Quite so-quite so! But this is all mere nonsense. I came here to speak of so
mething quite different, something very important, prince. And I have determined
 to come to you as to a man in whose sincerity and nobility of feeling I can tru
st like-like-are you surprised at my words, prince?"
   The prince was watching his guest, if not with much surprise, at all events w
ith great attention and curiosity.
   The old man was very pale; every now and then his lips trembled, and his hand
s seemed unable to rest quietly, but continually moved from place to place. He h
ad twice already jumped up from his chair and sat down again without being in th
e least aware of it. He would take up a hook from the table and open it-talking 
all the while,-look at the heading of a chapter, shut it and put it back again, 
seizing another immediately, but holding it unopened in his hand, and waving it 
in the air as he spoke.
   "But enough!" he cried, suddenly. "I see I have been boring you with my-"
   "Not in the least-not in the least, I assure you. On the contrary, I am liste
ning most attentively, and am anxious to guess-"
   "Prince, I wish to place myself in a respectable position-I wish to esteem my
self-and to-"
   "My dear sir, a man of such noble aspirations is worthy of all esteem by virt
ue of those aspirations alone."
   The prince brought out his "copy-book sentence" in the firm belief that it wo
uld produce a good effect. He felt instinctively that some such well-sounding hu
mbug, brought out at the proper moment, would soothe the old man's feelings, and
 would be specially acceptable to such a man in such a position. At all hazards,
 his guest must be despatched with heart relieved and spirit comforted; that was
 the problem before the prince at this moment.
   The phrase flattered the general, touched him, and pleased him mightily. He i
mmediately changed his tone, and started off on a long and solemn explanation. B
ut listen as he would, the prince could make neither head nor tail of it.
   The general spoke hotly and quickly for ten minutes; he spoke as though his w
ords could not keep pace with his crowding thoughts.
   Tears stood in his eyes, and yet his speech was nothing but a collection of d
isconnected sentences, without beginning and without end-a string of unexpected 
words and unexpected sentiments-colliding with one another, and jumping over one
 another, as they burst from his lips.
   "Enough!" he concluded at last, "you understand me, and that is the great thi
ng. A heart like yours cannot help understanding the sufferings of another. Prin
ce, you are the ideal of generosity; what are other men beside yourself? But you
 are young-accept my blessing! My principal object is to beg you to fix an hour 
for a most important conversation-that is my great hope, prince. My heart needs 
but a little friendship and sympathy, and yet I cannot always find means to sati
sfy it."
   "But why not now? I am ready to listen, and-"
   "No, no-prince, not now! Now is a dream! And it is too, too important! It is 
to be the hour of Fate to me-MY OWN hour. Our interview is not to be broken in u
pon by every chance comer, every impertinent guest-and there are plenty of such 
stupid, impertinent fellows"-(he bent over and whispered mysteriously, with a fu
nny, frightened look on his face)-"who are unworthy to tie your shoe, prince. I 
don't say MINE, mind-you will understand me, prince. Only YOU understand me, pri
nce-no one else. HE doesn't understand me, he is absolutely-ABSOLUTELY unable to
 sympathize. The first qualification for understanding another is Heart."
   The prince was rather alarmed at all this, and was obliged to end by appointi
ng the same hour of the following day for the interview desired. The general lef
t him much comforted and far less agitated than when he had arrived.
   At seven in the evening, the prince sent to request Lebedeff to pay him a vis
it. Lebedeff came at once, and "esteemed it an honour," as he observed, the inst
ant he entered the room. He acted as though there had never been the slightest s
uspicion of the fact that he had systematically avoided the prince for the last 
three days.
   He sat down on the edge of his chair, smiling and making faces, and rubbing h
is hands, and looking as though he were in delighted expectation of hearing some
 important communication, which had been long guessed by all.
   The prince was instantly covered with confusion; for it appeared to be plain 
that everyone expected something of him-that everyone looked at him as though an
xious to congratulate him, and greeted him with hints, and smiles, and knowing l
ooks.
   Keller, for instance, had run into the house three times of late,
   "just for a moment," and each time with the air of desiring to offer his cong
ratulations. Colia, too, in spite of his melancholy, had once or twice begun sen
tences in much the same strain of suggestion or insinuation.
   The prince, however, immediately began, with some show of annoyance, to quest
ion Lebedeff categorically, as to the general's present condition, and his opini
on thereon. He described the morning's interview in a few words.
   "Everyone has his worries, prince, especially in these strange and troublous 
times of ours," Lebedeff replied, drily, and with the air of a man disappointed 
of his reasonable expectations.
   "Dear me, what a philosopher you are!" laughed the prince.
   Philosophy is necessary, sir-very necessary-in our day. It is too much neglec
ted. As for me, much esteemed prince, I am sensible of having experienced the ho
nour of your confidence in a certain matter up to a certain point, but never bey
ond that point. I do not for a moment complain-"
   "Lebedeff, you seem to be angry for some reason!" said the prince.
   "Not the least bit in the world, esteemed and revered prince! Not the least b
it in the world!" cried Lebedeff, solemnly, with his hand upon his heart. "On th
e contrary, I am too painfully aware that neither by my position in the world, n
or by my gifts of intellect and heart, nor by my riches, nor by any former condu
ct of mine, have I in any way deserved your confidence, which is far above my hi
ghest aspirations and hopes. Oh no, prince; I may serve you, but only as your hu
mble slave! I am not angry, oh no!
   Not angry; pained perhaps, but nothing more.
   "My dear Lebedeff, I-"
   "Oh, nothing more, nothing more! I was saying to myself but now
   'I am quite unworthy of friendly relations with him,' say I; 'but perhaps as 
landlord of this house I may, at some future date, in his good time, receive inf
ormation as to certain imminent and much to be desired changes-'"
   So saying Lebedeff fixed the prince with his sharp little eyes, still in hope
 that he would get his curiosity satisfied.
   The prince looked back at him in amazement.
   "I don't understand what you are driving at!" he cried, almost angrily, "and,
 and-what an intriguer you are, Lebedeff!" he added, bursting into a fit of genu
ine laughter.
   Lebedeff followed suit at once, and it was clear from his radiant face that h
e considered his prospects of satisfaction immensely improved.
   "And do you know," the prince continued, "I am amazed at your naive ways, Leb
edeff! Don't he angry with me-not only yours, everybody else's also! You are wai
ting to hear something from me at this very moment with such simplicity that I d
eclare I feel quite ashamed of myself for having nothing whatever to tell you.
   I swear to you solemnly, that there is nothing to tell. There!
   Can you take that in?" The prince laughed again.
   Lebedeff assumed an air of dignity. It was true enough that he was sometimes 
naive to a degree in his curiosity; but he was also an excessively cunning gentl
eman, and the prince was almost converting him into an enemy by his repeated reb
uffs. The prince did not snub Lebedeff's curiosity, however, because he felt any
 contempt for him; but simply because the subject was too delicate to talk about
. Only a few days before he had looked upon his own dreams almost as crimes. But
 Lebedeff considered the refusal as caused by personal dislike to himself, and w
as hurt accordingly.
   Indeed, there was at this moment a piece of news, most interesting to the pri
nce, which Lebedeff knew and even had wished to tell him, but which he now kept 
obstinately to himself.
   "And what can I do for you, esteemed prince? Since I am told you sent for me 
just now," he said, after a few moments' silence.
   "Oh, it was about the general," began the prince, waking abruptly from the fi
t of musing which he too had indulged in "and-and about the theft you told me of
."
   "That is-er-about-what theft?"
   "Oh come! just as if you didn't understand, Lukian Timofeyovitch!
   What are you up to? I can't make you out! The money, the money, sir! The four
 hundred roubles that you lost that day. You came and told me about it one morni
ng, and then went off to Petersburg. There, NOW do you understand?"
   "Oh-h-h! You mean the four hundred roubles!" said Lebedeff, dragging the word
s out, just as though it had only just dawned upon him what the prince was talki
ng about. "Thanks very much, prince, for your kind interest-you do me too much h
onour. I found the money, long ago!"
   "You found it? Thank God for that!"
   "Your exclamation proves the generous sympathy of your nature, prince; for fo
ur hundred roubles-to a struggling family man like myself-is no small matter!"
   "I didn't mean that; at least, of course, I'm glad for your sake, too," added
 the prince, correcting himself, " but-how did you find it?"
   "Very simply indeed! I found it under the chair upon which my coat had hung; 
so that it is clear the purse simply fell out of the pocket and on to the floor!
"
   "Under the chair? Impossible! Why, you told me yourself that you had searched
 every corner of the room? How could you not have looked in the most likely plac
e of all?"
   "Of course I looked there,-of course I did! Very much so! I looked and scramb
led about, and felt for it, and wouldn't believe it was not there, and looked ag
ain and again. It is always so in such cases. One longs and expects to find a lo
st article; one sees it is not there, and the place is as hare as one's palm; an
d yet one returns and looks again and again, fifteen or twenty times, likely eno
ugh!"
   "Oh, quite so, of course. But how was it in your case?-I don't quite understa
nd," said the bewildered prince. "You say it wasn't there at first, and that you
 searched the place thoroughly, and yet it turned up on that very spot!"
   "Yes, sir-on that very spot." The prince gazed strangely at Lebedeff. "And th
e general?" he asked, abruptly.
   "The-the general? How do you mean, the general?" said Lebedeff, dubiously, as
 though he had not taken in the drift of the prince's remark.
   "Oh, good heavens! I mean, what did the general say when the purse turned up 
under the chair? You and he had searched for it together there, hadn't you?"
   "Quite so-together! But the second time I thought better to say nothing about
 finding it. I found it alone."
   "But-why in the world-and the money? Was it all there?"
   "I opened the purse and counted it myself; right to a single rouble."
   "I think you might have come and told me," said the prince, thoughtfully.
   "Oh-I didn't like to disturb you, prince, in the midst of your private and do
ubtless most interesting personal reflections.
   Besides, I wanted to appear, myself, to have found nothing. I took the purse,
 and opened it, and counted the money, and shut it and put it down again under t
he chair."
   "What in the world for?"
   "Oh, just out of curiosity," said Lebedeff, rubbing his hands and sniggering.
   "What, it's still there then, is it? Ever since the day before yesterday?"
   "Oh no! You see, I was half in hopes the general might find it.
   Because if I found it, why should not he too observe an object lying before h
is very eyes? I moved the chair several times so as to expose the purse to view,
 but the general never saw it. He is very absent just now, evidently. He talks a
nd laughs and tells stories, and suddenly flies into a rage with me, goodness kn
ows why."
   "Well, but-have you taken the purse away now?"
   "No, it disappeared from under the chair in the night."
   "Where is it now, then?"
   "Here," laughed Lebedeff, at last, rising to his full height and looking plea
santly at the prince, "here, in the lining of my coat. Look, you can feel it for
 yourself, if you like!"
   Sure enough there was something sticking out of the front of the coat-somethi
ng large. It certainly felt as though it might well be the purse fallen through 
a hole in the pocket into the lining.
   "I took it out and had a look at it; it's all right. I've let it slip back in
to the lining now, as you see, and so I have been walking about ever since yeste
rday morning; it knocks against my legs when I walk along."
   "H'm! and you take no notice of it?"
   "Quite so, I take no notice of it. Ha, ha! and think of this, prince, my pock
ets are always strong and whole, and yet, here in one night, is a huge hole. I k
now the phenomenon is unworthy of your notice; but such is the case. I examined 
the hole, and I declare it actually looks as though it had been made with a penk
nife, a most improbable contingency."
   "And-and-the general?"
   "Ah, very angry all day, sir; all yesterday and all today. He shows decided b
acchanalian predilections at one time, and at another is tearful and sensitive, 
but at any moment he is liable to paroxysms of such rage that I assure you, prin
ce, I am quite alarmed. I am not a military man, you know. Yesterday we were sit
ting together in the tavern, and the lining of my coat was-quite accidentally, o
f course-sticking out right in front. The general squinted at it, and flew into 
a rage. He never looks me quite in the face now, unless he is very drunk or maud
lin; but yesterday he looked at me in such a way that a shiver went all down my 
back. I intend to find the purse tomorrow; but till then I am going to have anot
her night of it with him."
   "What's the good of tormenting him like this?" cried the prince.
   "I don't torment him, prince, I don't indeed!" cried Lebedeff, hotly. "I love
 him, my dear sir, I esteem him; and believe it or not, I love him all the bette
r for this business, yes-and value him more."
   Lebedeff said this so seriously that the prince quite lost his temper with hi
m.
   "Nonsense! love him and torment him so! Why, by the very fact that he put the
 purse prominently before you, first under the chair and then in your lining, he
 shows that he does not wish to deceive you, but is anxious to beg your forgiven
ess in this artless way. Do you hear? He is asking your pardon. He confides in t
he delicacy of your feelings, and in your friendship for him.
   And you can allow yourself to humiliate so thoroughly honest a man!"
   "Thoroughly honest, quite so, prince, thoroughly honest!" said Lebedeff, with
 flashing eyes. "And only you, prince, could have found so very appropriate an e
xpression. I honour you for it, prince. Very well, that's settled; I shall find 
the purse now and not tomorrow. Here, I find it and take it out before your eyes
!
   And the money is all right. Take it, prince, and keep it till tomorrow, will 
you? Tomorrow or next day I'll take it back again.
   I think, prince, that the night after its disappearance it was buried under a
 bush in the garden. So I believe-what do you think of that?"
   "Well, take care you don't tell him to his face that you have found the purse
. Simply let him see that it is no longer in the lining of your coat, and form h
is own conclusions."
   "Do you think so? Had I not just better tell him I have found it, and pretend
 I never guessed where it was?"
   "No, I don't think so," said the prince, thoughtfully; "it's too late for tha
t-that would be dangerous now. No, no! Better say nothing about it. Be nice with
 him, you know, but don't show him -oh, YOU know well enough-"
   "I know, prince, of course I know, but I'm afraid I shall not carry it out; f
or to do so one needs a heart like your own. He is so very irritable just now, a
nd so proud. At one moment he will embrace me, and the next he flies out at me a
nd sneers at me, and then I stick the lining forward on purpose. Well, au revoir
, prince, I see I am keeping you, and boring you, too, interfering with your mos
t interesting private reflections."
   "Now, do be careful! Secrecy, as before!"
   "Oh, silence isn't the word! Softly, softly!"
   But in spite of this conclusion to the episode, the prince remained as puzzle
d as ever, if not more so. He awaited next morning's interview with the general 
most impatiently.
      IV.
   THE time appointed was twelve o'clock, and the prince, returning home unexpec
tedly late, found the general waiting for him. At the first glance, he saw that 
the latter was displeased, perhaps because he had been kept waiting. The prince 
apologized, and quickly took a seat. He seemed strangely timid before the genera
l this morning, for some reason, and felt as though his visitor were some piece 
of china which he was afraid of breaking.
   On scrutinizing him, the prince soon saw that the general was quite a differe
nt man from what he had been the day before; he looked like one who had come to 
some momentous resolve. His calmness, however, was more apparent than real. He w
as courteous, but there was a suggestion of injured innocence in his manner.
   "I've brought your book back," he began, indicating a book lying on the table
. "Much obliged to you for lending it to me."
   "Ah, yes. Well, did you read it, general? It's curious, isn't it?" said the p
rince, delighted to be able to open up conversation upon an outside subject.
   "Curious enough, yes, but crude, and of course dreadful nonsense; probably th
e man lies in every other sentence."
   The general spoke with considerable confidence, and dragged his words out wit
h a conceited drawl.
   "Oh, but it's only the simple tale of an old soldier who saw the French enter
 Moscow. Some of his remarks were wonderfully interesting. Remarks of an eye-wit
ness are always valuable, whoever he be, don't you think so "Had I been the publ
isher I should not have printed it. As to the evidence of eye-witnesses, in thes
e days people prefer impudent lies to the stories of men of worth and long servi
ce. I know of some notes of the year 1812, which-I have determined, prince, to l
eave this house, Mr. Lebedeff's house."
   The general looked significantly at his host.
   "Of course you have your own lodging at Pavlofsk at-at your daughter's house,
" began the prince, quite at a loss what to say.
   He suddenly recollected that the general had come for advice on a most import
ant matter, affecting his destiny.
   "At my wife's; in other words, at my own place, my daughter's house."
   "I beg your pardon, I-"
   "I leave Lebedeff's house, my dear prince, because I have quarrelled with thi
s person. I broke with him last night, and am very sorry that I did not do so be
fore. I expect respect, prince, even from those to whom I give my heart, so to s
peak. Prince, I have often given away my heart, and am nearly always deceived.
   This person was quite unworthy of the gift."
   "There is much that might be improved in him," said the prince, moderately, "
but he has some qualities which-though amid them one cannot but discern a cunnin
g nature-reveal what is often a diverting intellect."
   The prince's tone was so natural and respectful that the general could not po
ssibly suspect him of any insincerity.
   "Oh, that he possesses good traits, I was the first to show, when I very near
ly made him a present of my friendship. I am not dependent upon his hospitality,
 and upon his house; I have my own family. I do not attempt to justify my own we
akness. I have drunk with this man, and perhaps I deplore the fact now, but I di
d not take him up for the sake of drink alone (excuse the crudeness of the expre
ssion, prince); I did not make friends with him for that alone. I was attracted 
by his good qualities; but when the fellow declares that he was a child in 1812,
 and had his left leg cut off, and buried in the Vagarkoff cemetery, in Moscow, 
such a cock-and-bull story amounts to disrespect, my dear sir, to-to impudent ex
aggeration."
   "Oh, he was very likely joking; he said it for fun."
   "I quite understand you. You mean that an innocent lie for the sake of a good
 joke is harmless, and does not offend the human heart. Some people lie, if you 
like to put it so, out of pure friendship, in order to amuse their fellows; but 
when a man makes use of extravagance in order to show his disrespect and to make
 clear how the intimacy bores him, it is time for a man of honour to break off t
he said intimacy., and to teach the offender his place."
   The general flushed with indignation as he spoke.
   "Oh, but Lebedeff cannot have been in Moscow in 1812. He is much too young; i
t is all nonsense."
   "Very well, but even if we admit that he was alive in 1812, can one believe t
hat a French chasseur pointed a cannon at him for a lark, and shot his left leg 
off? He says he picked his own leg up and took it away and buried it in the ceme
tery. He swore he had a stone put up over it with the inscription: 'Here lies th
e leg of Collegiate Secretary Lebedeff,' and on the other side, 'Rest, beloved a
shes, till the morn of joy,' and that he has a service read over it every year (
which is simply sacrilege), and goes to Moscow once a year on purpose. He invite
s me to Moscow in order to prove his assertion, and show me his leg's tomb, and 
the very cannon that shot him; he says it's the eleventh from the gate of the Kr
emlin, an old-fashioned falconet taken from the French afterwards."
   "And, meanwhile both his legs are still on his body," said the prince, laughi
ng. "I assure you, it is only an innocent joke, and you need not be angry about 
it."
   "Excuse me-wait a minute-he says that the leg we see is a wooden one, made by
 Tchernosvitoff."
   "They do say one can dance with those!"
   "Quite so, quite so; and he swears that his wife never found out that one of 
his legs was wooden all the while they were married.
   When I showed him the ridiculousness of all this, he said, 'Well, if you were
 one of Napoleon's pages in 1812, you might let me bury my leg in the Moscow cem
etery.' "Why, did you say-" began the prince, and paused in confusion.
   The general gazed at his host disdainfully.
   "Oh, go on," he said, "finish your sentence, by all means. Say how odd it app
ears to you that a man fallen to such a depth of humiliation as I, can ever have
 been the actual eye-witness of great events. Go on, I don't mind! Has he found 
time to tell you scandal about me?"
   "No, I've heard nothing of this from Lebedeff, if you mean Lebedeff."
   "H'm; I thought differently. You see, we were talking over this period of his
tory. I was criticizing a current report of something which then happened, and h
aving been myself an eyewitness of the occurrence-you are smiling, prince-you ar
e looking at my face as if-"
   "Oh no! not at all-I-"
   "I am rather young-looking, I know; but I am actually older than I appear to 
be. I was ten or eleven in the year 1812. I don't know my age exactly, but it ha
s always been a weakness of mine to make it out less than it really is.
   "I assure you, general, I do not in the least doubt your statement. One of ou
r living autobiographers states that when he was a small baby in Moscow in 1812 
the French soldiers fed him with bread."
   "Well, there you see!" said the general, condescendingly. "There is nothing w
hatever unusual about my tale. Truth very often appears to be impossible. I was 
a page-it sounds strange, I dare say. Had I been fifteen years old I should prob
ably have been terribly frightened when the French arrived, as my mother was (wh
o had been too slow about clearing out of Moscow); but as I was only just ten I 
was not in the least alarmed, and rushed through the crowd to the very door of t
he palace when Napoleon alighted from his horse."
   "Undoubtedly, at ten years old you would not have felt the sense of fear, as 
you say," blurted out the prince, horribly uncomfortable in the sensation that h
e was just about to blush.
   "Of course; and it all happened so easily and naturally. And yet, were a nove
list to describe the episode, he would put in all kinds of impossible and incred
ible details."
   "Oh," cried the prince, "I have often thought that! Why, I know of a murder, 
for the sake of a watch. It's in all the papers now.
   But if some writer had invented it, all the critics would have jumped down hi
s throat and said the thing was too improbable for anything. And yet you read it
 in the paper, and you can't help thinking that out of these strange disclosures
 is to be gained the full knowledge of Russian life and character. You said that
 well, general; it is so true," concluded the prince, warmly, delighted to have 
found a refuge from the fiery blushes which had covered his face.
   "Yes, it's quite true, isn't it?" cried the general, his eyes sparkling with 
gratification. "A small boy, a child, would naturally realize no danger; he woul
d shove his way through the crowds to see the shine and glitter of the uniforms,
 and especially the great man of whom everyone was speaking, for at that time al
l the world had been talking of no one but this man for some years past. The wor
ld was full of his name; I-so to speak-drew it in with my mother's milk. Napoleo
n, passing a couple of paces from me, caught sight of me accidentally. I was ver
y well dressed, and being all alone, in that crowd, as you will easily imagine
   "Oh, of course! Naturally the sight impressed him, and proved to him that not
 ALL the aristocracy had left Moscow; that at least some nobles and their childr
en had remained behind."
   Just so just so! He wanted to win over the aristocracy! When his eagle eye fe
ll on me, mine probably flashed back in response.'
   Voila un garcon bien eveille! Qui est ton pere?' I immediately replied, almos
t panting with excitement, 'A general, who died on the battle-fields of his coun
try! "Le fils d'un boyard et d'un brave, pardessus le marche. J'aime les boyards
. M'aimes-tu, petit?' To this keen question I replied as keenly, 'The Russian he
art can recognize a great man even in the bitter enemy of his country.' At least
, I don't remember the exact words, you know, but the idea was as I say. Napoleo
n was struck; he thought a minute and then said to his suite: 'I like that boy's
 pride; if all Russians think like this child', then he didn't finish, hut went 
on and entered the palace. I instantly mixed with his suite, and followed him. I
 was already in high favour. I remember when he came into the first hall, the em
peror stopped before a portrait of the Empress Katherine, and after a thoughtful
 glance remarked, 'That was a great woman,' and passed on.
   "Well, in a couple of days I was known all over the palace and the Kremlin as
 'le petit boyard.' I only went home to sleep. They were nearly out of their min
ds about me at home. A couple of days after this, Napoleon's page, De Bazancour,
 died; he had not been able to stand the trials of the campaign. Napoleon rememb
ered me;
   I was taken away without explanation; the dead page's uniform was tried on me
, and when I was taken before the emperor, dressed in it, he nodded his head to 
me, and I was told that I was appointed to the vacant post of page.
   "Well, I was glad enough, for I had long felt the greatest sympathy for this 
man; and then the pretty uniform and all that-only a child, you know-and so on. 
It was a dark green dress coat with gold buttons-red facings, white trousers, an
d a white silk waistcoat-silk stockings, shoes with buckles, and top-boots if I 
were riding out with his majesty or with the suite.
   "Though the position of all of us at that time was not particularly brilliant
, and the poverty was dreadful all round, yet the etiquette at court was strictl
y preserved, and the more strictly in proportion to the growth of the foreboding
s of disaster."
   "Quite so, quite so, of course!" murmured the poor prince, who didn't know wh
ere to look. "Your memoirs would be most interesting."
   The general was, of course, repeating what he had told Lebedeff the night bef
ore, and thus brought it out glibly enough, but here he looked suspiciously at t
he prince out of the corners of his eyes.
   "My memoirs!" he began, with redoubled pride and dignity. "Write my memoirs? 
The idea has not tempted me. And yet, if you please, my memoirs have long been w
ritten, but they shall not see the light until dust returns to dust. Then, I dou
bt not, they will be translated into all languages, not of course on account of 
their actual literary merit, but because of the great events of which I was the 
actual witness, though but a child at the time. As a child, I was able to penetr
ate into the secrecy of the great man's private room. At nights I have heard the
 groans and wailings of this 'giant in distress.' He could feel no shame in weep
ing before such a mere child as I was, though I understood even then that the re
ason for his suffering was the silence of the Emperor Alexander."
   "Yes, of course; he had written letters to the latter with proposals of peace
, had he not?" put in the prince.
   "We did not know the details of his proposals, but he wrote letter after lett
er, all day and every day. He was dreadfully agitated. Sometimes at night I woul
d throw myself upon his breast with tears (Oh, how I loved that man!). 'Ask forg
iveness, Oh, ask forgiveness of the Emperor Alexander!' I would cry. I should ha
ve said, of course, 'Make peace with Alexander,' but as a child I expressed my i
dea in the naive way recorded. 'Oh, my child,' he would say (he loved to talk to
 me and seemed to forget my tender years), 'Oh, my child, I am ready to kiss Ale
xander's feet, but I hate and abominate the King of Prussia and the Austrian Emp
eror, and-and-but you know nothing of politics, my child.' He would pull up, rem
embering whom he was speaking to, but his eyes would sparkle for a long while af
ter this. Well now, if I were to describe all this, and I have seen greater even
ts than these, all these critical gentlemen of the press and political parties-O
h, no thanks! I'm their very humble servant, but no thanks!"
   "Quite so-parties-you are very right," said the prince. "I was reading a book
 about Napoleon and the Waterloo campaign only the other day, by Charasse, in wh
ich the author does not attempt to conceal his joy at Napoleon's discomfiture at
 every page. Well now, I don't like that; it smells of 'party,' you know. You ar
e quite right. And were you much occupied with your service under Napoleon?"
   The general was in ecstasies, for the prince's remarks, made, as they evident
ly were, in all seriousness and simplicity, quite dissipated the last relics of 
his suspicion.
   "I know Charasse's book! Oh! I was so angry with his work! I wrote to him and
 said-I forget what, at this moment. You ask whether I was very busy under the E
mperor? Oh no! I was called 'page,' but hardly took my duty seriously. Besides, 
Napoleon very soon lost hope of conciliating the Russians, and he would have for
gotten all about me had he not loved me-for personal reasons-I don't mind saying
 so now. My heart was greatly drawn to him, too. My duties were light. I merely 
had to be at the palace occasionally to escort the Emperor out riding, and that 
was about all. I rode very fairly well. He used to have a ride before dinner, an
d his suite on those occasions were generally Davoust, myself, and Roustan."
   "Constant?" said the prince, suddenly, and quite involuntarily.
   "No; Constant was away then, taking a letter to the Empress Josephine. Instea
d of him there were always a couple of orderlies-and that was all, excepting, of
 course, the generals and marshals whom Napoleon always took with him for the in
spection of various localities, and for the sake of consultation generally. I re
member there was one-Davoust-nearly always with him-a big man with spectacles. T
hey used to argue and quarrel sometimes. Once they were in the Emperor's study t
ogether-just those two and myself-I was unobserved-and they argued, and the Empe
ror seemed to be agreeing to something under protest. Suddenly his eye fell on m
e and an idea seemed to flash across him.
   "'Child,' he said, abruptly. 'If I were to recognize the Russian orthodox rel
igion and emancipate the serfs, do you think Russia would come over to me?'"
   "'Never!' I cried, indignantly."
   "The Emperor was much struck."
   "'In the flashing eyes of this patriotic child I read and accept the fiat of 
the Russian people. Enough, Davoust, it is mere phantasy on our part. Come, let'
s hear your other project.'"
   "'Yes, but that was a great idea," said the prince, clearly interested. "You 
ascribe it to Davoust, do you?"
   "Well, at all events, they were consulting together at the time.
   Of course it was the idea of an eagle, and must have originated with Napoleon
; but the other project was good too-it was the 'Conseil du lion!' as Napoleon c
alled it. This project consisted in a proposal to occupy the Kremlin with the wh
ole army; to arm and fortify it scientifically, to kill as many horses as could 
be got, and salt their flesh, and spend the winter there; and in spring to fight
 their way out. Napoleon liked the idea-it attracted him. We rode round the Krem
lin walls every day, and Napoleon used to give orders where they were to be patc
hed, where built up, where pulled down and so on. All was decided at last.
   They were alone together-those two and myself.
   "Napoleon was walking up and down with folded arms. I could not take my eyes 
off his face-my heart beat loudly and painfully.
   "'I'm off,' said Davoust. 'Where to?' asked Napoleon.
   "'To salt horse-flesh,' said Davoust. Napoleon shuddered-his fate was being d
ecided.
   "'Child,' he addressed me suddenly, 'what do you think of our plan?' Of cours
e he only applied to me as a sort of toss-up, you know. I turned to Davoust and 
addressed my reply to him. I said, as though inspired:
   "'Escape, general! Go home!-' "The project was abandoned; Davoust shrugged hi
s shoulders and went out, whispering to himself-'Bah, il devient superstitieux!'
   Next morning the order to retreat was given."
   "All this is most interesting," said the prince, very softly, "if it really w
as so-that is, I mean-" he hastened to correct himself.
   "Oh, my dear prince," cried the general, who was now so intoxicated with his 
own narrative that he probably could not have pulled up at the most patent indis
cretion.
   "You say, if it really was so!' There was more-much more, I assure you! These
 are merely a few little political acts. I tell you I was the eye-witness of the
 nightly sorrow and groanings of the great man, and of that no one can speak but
 myself. Towards the end he wept no more, though he continued to emit an occasio
nal groan; but his face grew more overcast day by day, as though Eternity were w
rapping its gloomy mantle about him.
   Occasionally we passed whole hours of silence together at night, Roustan snor
ing in the next room-that fellow slept like a pig.
   'But he's loyal to me and my dynasty,' said Napoleon of him.
   "Sometimes it was very painful to me, and once he caught me with tears in my 
eyes. He looked at me kindly. 'You are sorry for me,' he said, 'you, my child, a
nd perhaps one other child-my son, the King of Rome-may grieve for me. All the r
est hate me; and my brothers are the first to betray me in misfortune.' I sobbed
 and threw myself into his arms. He could not resist me-he burst into tears, and
 our tears mingled as we folded each other in a close embrace.
   "'Write, oh, write a letter to the Empress Josephine!' I cried, sobbing. Napo
leon started, reflected, and said, 'You remind me of a third heart which loves m
e. Thank you, my friend;' and then and there he sat down and wrote that letter t
o Josephine, with which Constant was sent off next day."
   "You did a good action," said the prince, "for in the midst of his angry feel
ings you insinuated a kind thought into his heart."
   "Just so, prince, just so. How well you bring out that fact!
   Because your own heart is good!" cried the ecstatic old gentleman, and, stran
gely enough, real tears glistened in his eyes." Yes, prince, it was a wonderful 
spectacle. And, do you know, I all but went off to Paris, and should assuredly h
ave shared his solitary exile with him; but, alas, our destinies were otherwise 
ordered! We parted, he to his island, where I am sure he thought of the weeping 
child who had embraced him so affectionately at parting in Moscow; and I was sen
t off to the cadet corps, where I found nothing but roughness and harsh discipli
ne. Alas, my happy days were done!
   "'I do not wish to deprive your mother of you, and, therefore, I will not ask
 you to go with me,' he said, the morning of his departure, 'but I should like t
o do something for you.' He was mounting his horse as he spoke. 'Write something
 in my sister's album for me,' I said rather timidly, for he was in a state of g
reat dejection at the moment. He turned, called for a pen, took the album. 'How 
old is your sister?' he asked, holding the pen in his hand. 'Three years old,' I
 said. 'Ah, petite fille alors!' and he wrote in the album: 'Ne mentes jamais!
   NAPOLEON (votre ami sincere).' "Such advice, and at such a moment, you must a
llow, prince, was-"
   "Yes, quite so; very remarkable."
   "This page of the album, framed in gold, hung on the wall of my sister's draw
ing-room all her life, in the most conspicuous place, till the day of her death;
 where it is now, I really don't know.
   Heavens! it's two o'clock! HOW I have kept you, prince! It is really most unp
ardonable of me.
   The general rose.
   "Oh, not in the least," said the prince. " On the contrary, I have been so mu
ch interested, I'm really very much obliged to you."
   "Prince,", said the general, pressing his hand, and looking at him with flash
ing eyes, and an expression as though he were under the influence of a sudden th
ought which had come upon him with stunning force. "Prince, you are so kind, so 
simple-minded, that sometimes I really feel sorry for you! I gaze at you with a 
feeling of real affection. Oh, Heaven bless you! May your life blossom and fruct
ify in love. Mine is over. Forgive me, forgive me!"
   He left the room quickly, covering his face with his hands.
   The prince could not doubt the sincerity of his agitation. He understood, too
, that the old man had left the room intoxicated with his own success. The gener
al belonged to that class of liars, who, in spite of their transports of lying, 
invariably suspect that they are not believed. On this occasion, when he recover
ed from his exaltation, he would probably suspect Muishkin of pitying him, and f
eel insulted.
   "Have I been acting rightly in allowing him to develop such vast resources of
 imagination?" the prince asked himself. But his answer was a fit of violent lau
ghter which lasted ten whole minutes. He tried to reproach himself for the laugh
ing fit, but eventually concluded that he needn't do so, since in spite of it he
 was truly sorry for the old man. The same evening he received a strange letter,
 short but decided. The general informed him that they must part for ever; that 
he was grateful, but that even from him he could not accept "signs of sympathy w
hich were humiliating to the dignity of a man already miserable enough."
   When the prince heard that the old man had gone to Nina Alexandrovna, though,
 he felt almost easy on his account.
   We have seen, however, that the general paid a visit to Lizabetha Prokofievna
 and caused trouble there, the final upshot being that he frightened Mrs. Epanch
in, and angered her by bitter hints as to his son Gania.
   He had been turned out in disgrace, eventually, and this was the cause of his
 bad night and quarrelsome day, which ended in his sudden departure into the str
eet in a condition approaching insanity, as recorded before.
   Colia did not understand the position. He tried severity with his father, as 
they stood in the street after the latter had cursed the household, hoping to br
ing him round that way.
   "Well, where are we to go to now, father?" he asked. "You don't want to go to
 the prince's; you have quarrelled with Lebedeff; you have no money; I never hav
e any; and here we are in the middle of the road, in a nice sort of mess."
   "Better to be of a mess than in a mess! I remember making a joke something li
ke that at the mess in eighteen hundred and forty-forty-I forget. 'Where is my y
outh, where is my golden youth?'
   Who was it said that, Colia?"
   "It was Gogol, in Dead Souls, father," cried Colia, glancing at him in some a
larm.
   "'Dead Souls,' yes, of course, dead. When I die, Colia, you must engrave on m
y tomb:
   "'Here lies a Dead Soul,
   Shame pursues me.'
   "Who said that, Colia?"
   "I don't know, father."
   "There was no Eropegoff? Eroshka Eropegoff?" he cried, suddenly, stopping in 
the road in a frenzy. "No Eropegoff! And my own son to say it! Eropegoff was in 
the place of a brother to me for eleven months. I fought a duel for him. He was 
married afterwards, and then killed on the field of battle. The bullet struck th
e cross on my breast and glanced off straight into his temple. 'I'll never forge
t you,' he cried, and expired. I served my country well and honestly, Colia, but
 shame, shame has pursued me! You and Nina will come to my grave, Colia; poor Ni
na, I always used to call her Nina in the old days, and how she loved Nina, Nina,
 oh, Nina. What have I ever done to deserve your forgiveness and long-suffering?
 Oh, Colia, your mother has an angelic spirit, an angelic spirit, Colia!"
   "I know that, father. Look here, dear old father, come back home!
   Let's go back to mother. Look, she ran after us when we came out.
   What have you stopped her for, just as though you didn't take in what I said?
 Why are you crying, father?"
   Poor Colia cried himself, and kissed the old man's hands "You kiss my hands, 
MINE?"
   "Yes, yes, yours, yours! What is there to surprise anyone in that?
   Come, come, you mustn't go on like this, crying in the middle of the road; an
d you a general too, a military man! Come, let's go back."
   "God bless you, dear boy, for being respectful to a disgraced man. Yes, to a 
poor disgraced old fellow, your father. You shall have such a son yourself; le r
oi de Rome. Oh, curses on this house!"
   "Come, come, what does all this mean?" cried Colia beside himself at last. "W
hat is it? What has happened to you? Why don't you wish to come back home? Why h
ave you gone out of your mind, like this?"
   "I'll explain it, I'll explain all to you. Don't shout! You shall hear. Le ro
i de Rome. Oh, I am sad, I am melancholy!
   "'Nurse, where is your tomb?'"
   "Who said that, Colia?"
   "I don't know, I don't know who said it. Come home at once; come on! I'll pun
ch Gania's head myself, if you like-only come. Oh, where are you off to again?" 
The general was dragging him away towards the door a house near. He sat down on 
the step, still holding Colia by the hand.
   "Bend down-bend down your ear. I'll tell you all-disgrace-bend down, I'll tel
l you in your ear."
   "What are you dreaming of?" said poor, frightened Colia, stooping down toward
s the old man, all the same.
   "Le roi de Rome," whispered the general, trembling all over.
   "What? What DO you mean? What roi de Rome?"
   "I-I," the general continued to whisper, clinging more and more tightly to th
e boy's shoulder. "I-wish-to tell you-all-Maria-Maria Petrovna-Su-Su-Su"
   Colia broke loose, seized his father by the shoulders, and stared into his ey
es with frenzied gaze. The old man had grown livid-his lips were shaking, convul
sions were passing over his features. Suddenly he leant over and began to sink s
lowly into Colia's arms.
   "He's got a stroke!" cried Colia, loudly, realizing what was the matter at la
st.
      V.
   IN point of fact, Varia had rather exaggerated the certainty of her news as t
o the prince's betrothal to Aglaya. Very likely, with the perspicacity of her se
x, she gave out as an accomplished fact what she felt was pretty sure to become 
a fact in a few days. Perhaps she could not resist the satisfaction of pouring o
ne last drop of bitterness into her brother Gania's cup, in spite of her love fo
r him. At all events, she had been unable to obtain any definite news from the E
panchin girls-the most she could get out of them being hints and surmises, and s
o on.
   Perhaps Aglaya's sisters had merely been pumping Varia for news while pretend
ing to impart information; or perhaps, again, they had been unable to resist the
 feminine gratification of teasing a friend-for, after all this time, they could
 scarcely have helped divining the aim of her frequent visits.
   On the other hand, the prince, although he had told Lebedeff,-as we know, tha
t nothing had happened, and that he had nothing to impart,-the prince may have b
een in error. Something strange seemed to have happened, without anything defini
te having actually happened. Varia had guessed that with her true feminine insti
nct.
   How or why it came about that everyone at the Epanchins' became imbued with o
ne conviction-that something very important had happened to Aglaya, and that her
 fate was in process of settlement-it would be very difficult to explain. But no
 sooner had this idea taken root, than all at once declared that they had seen a
nd observed it long ago; that they had remarked it at the time of the "poor knig
ht" joke, and even before, though they had been unwilling to believe in such non
sense.
   So said the sisters. Of course, Lizabetha Prokofievna had foreseen it long be
fore the rest; her "heart had been sore" for a long while, she declared, and it 
was now so sore that she appeared to be quite overwhelmed, and the very thought 
of the prince became distasteful to her.
   There was a question to be decided-most important, but most difficult; so muc
h so, that Mrs. Epanchin did not even see how to put it into words. Would the pr
ince do or not? Was all this good or bad? If good (which might be the case, of c
ourse), WHY good?
   If bad (which was hardly doubtful), WHEREIN, especially, bad?
   Even the general, the paterfamilias, though astonished at first, suddenly dec
lared that, "upon his honour, he really believed he had fancied something of the
 kind, after all. At first, it seemed a new idea, and then, somehow, it looked a
s familiar as possible." His wife frowned him down there. This was in the mornin
g; but in the evening, alone with his wife, he had given tongue again.
   "Well, really, you know"-(silence)-"of course, you know all this is very stra
nge, if true, which I cannot deny; but"-(silence).-" But, on the other hand, if 
one looks things in the face, you know-upon my honour, the prince is a rare good
 fellow-and-and-and-well, his name, you know-your family name-all this looks wel
l, and perpetuates the name and title and all that-which at this moment is not s
tanding so high as it might-from one point of view-don't you know? The world, th
e world is the world, of course-and people will talk-and-and-the prince has prop
erty, you know-if it is not very large-and then he-he-" (Continued silence, and 
collapse of the general.) Hearing these words from her husband, Lizabetha Prokof
ievna was driven beside herself.
   According to her opinion, the whole thing had been one huge, fantastical, abs
urd, unpardonable mistake. "First of all, this prince is an idiot, and, secondly
, he is a fool-knows nothing of the world, and has no place in it. Whom can he b
e shown to? Where can you take him to? What will old Bielokonski say? We never t
hought of such a husband as THAT for our Aglaya!"
   Of course, the last argument was the chief one. The maternal heart trembled w
ith indignation to think of such an absurdity, although in that heart there rose
 another voice, which said: "And WHY is not the prince such a husband as you wou
ld have desired for Aglaya?" It was this voice which annoyed Lizabetha Prokofiev
na more than anything else.
   For some reason or other, the sisters liked the idea of the prince. They did 
not even consider it very strange; in a word, they might be expected at any mome
nt to range themselves strongly on his side. But both of them decided to say not
hing either way.
   It had always been noticed in the family that the stronger Mrs.
   Epanchin's opposition was to any project, the nearer she was, in reality, to 
giving in.
   Alexandra, however, found it difficult to keep absolute silence on the subjec
t. Long since holding, as she did, the post of "confidential adviser to mamma," 
she was now perpetually called in council, and asked her opinion, and especially
 her assistance, in order to recollect "how on earth all this happened?" Why did
 no one see it? Why did no one say anything about it? What did all that wretched
 "poor knight" joke mean? Why was she, Lizabetha Prokofievna, driven to think, a
nd foresee, and worry for everybody, while they all sucked their thumbs, and cou
nted the crows in the garden, and did nothing? At first, Alexandra had been very
 careful, and had merely replied that perhaps her father's remark was not so far
 out: that, in the eyes of the world, probably the choice of the prince as a hus
band for one of the Epanchin girls would be considered a very wise one. Warming 
up, however, she added that the prince was by no means a fool, and never had bee
n; and that as to "place in the world," no one knew what the position of a respe
ctable person in Russia would imply in a few years-whether it would depend on su
ccesses in the government service, on the old system, or what.
   To all this her mother replied that Alexandra was a freethinker, and that all
 this was due to that "cursed woman's rights question."
   Half an hour after this conversation, she went off to town, and thence to the
 Kammenny Ostrof, ["Stone Island," a suburb and park of St. Petersburg] to see P
rincess Bielokonski, who had just arrived from Moscow on a short visit. The prin
cess was Aglaya's godmother.
   "Old Bielokonski"listened to all the fevered and despairing lamentations of L
izabetha Prokofievna without the least emotion; the tears of this sorrowful moth
er did not evoke answering sighs-in fact, she laughed at her. She was a dreadful
 old despot, this princess; she could not allow equality in anything, not even i
n friendship of the oldest standing, and she insisted on treating Mrs. Epanchin 
as her protegee, as she had been thirty-five years ago. She could never put up w
ith the independence and energy of Lizabetha's character. She observed that, as 
usual, the whole family had gone much too far ahead, and had converted a fly int
o an elephant; that, so far as she had heard their story, she was persuaded that
 nothing of any seriousness had occurred; that it would surely be better to wait
 until something DID happen; that the prince, in her opinion, was a very decent 
young fellow, though perhaps a little eccentric, through illness, and not quite 
as weighty in the world as one could wish. The worst feature was, she said, Nast
asia Philipovna.
   Lizabetha Prokofievna well understood that the old lady was angry at the fail
ure of Evgenie Pavlovitch-her own recommendation. She returned home to Pavlofsk 
in a worse humour than when she left, and of course everybody in the house suffe
red. She pitched into everyone, because, she declared, they had 'gone mad.' Why 
were things always mismanaged in her house? Why had everybody been in such a fra
ntic hurry in this matter? So far as she could see, nothing whatever had happene
d. Surely they had better wait and see what was to happen, instead of making mou
ntains out of molehills.
   And so the conclusion of the matter was that it would be far better to take i
t quietly, and wait coolly to see what would turn up. But, alas! peace did not r
eign for more than ten minutes. The first blow dealt to its power was in certain
 news communicated to Lizabetha Prokofievna as to events which bad happened duri
ng her trip to see the princess. (This trip had taken place the day after that o
n which the prince had turned up at the Epanchins at nearly one o'clock at night
, thinking it was nine.) The sisters replied candidly and fully enough to their 
mother's impatient questions on her return. They said, in the first place, that 
nothing particular had happened since her departure; that the prince had been, a
nd that Aglaya had kept him waiting a long while before she appeared-half an hou
r, at least; that she had then come in, and immediately asked the prince to have
 a game of chess; that the prince did not know the game, and Aglaya had beaten h
im easily; that she had been in a wonderfully merry mood, and had laughed at the
 prince, and chaffed him so unmercifully that one was quite sorry to see his wre
tched expression.
   She had then asked him to play cards-the game called "little fools." At this 
game the tables were turned completely, for the prince had shown himself a maste
r at it. Aglaya had cheated and changed cards, and stolen others, in the most ba
re-faced way, but, in spite of everything the prince had beaten her hopelessly f
ive times running, and she had been left "little fool" each time.
   Aglaya then lost her temper, and began to say such awful things to the prince
 that he laughed no more, but grew dreadfully pale, especially when she said tha
t she should not remain in the house with him, and that he ought to be ashamed o
f coming to their house at all, especially at night, "AFTER ALL THAT HAD HAPPENE
D."
   So saying, she had left the room, banging the door after her, and the prince 
went off, looking as though he were on his way to a funeral, in spite of all the
ir attempts at consolation.
   Suddenly, a quarter of an hour after the prince's departure, Aglaya had rushe
d out of her room in such a hurry that she had not even wiped her eyes, which we
re full of tears. She came back because Colia had brought a hedgehog. Everybody 
came in to see the hedgehog. In answer to their questions Colia explained that t
he hedgehog was not his, and that he had left another boy, Kostia Lebedeff, wait
ing for him outside. Kostia was too shy to come in, because he was carrying a ha
tchet; they had bought the hedgehog and the hatchet from a peasant whom they had
 met on the road. He had offered to sell them the hedgehog, and they had paid fi
fty copecks for it; and the hatchet had so taken their fancy that they had made 
up their minds to buy it of their own accord.
   On hearing this, Aglaya urged Colia to sell her the hedgehog; she even called
 him "dear Colia," in trying to coax him. He refused for a long time, but at las
t he could hold out no more, and went to fetch Kostia Lebedeff. The latter appea
red, carrying his hatchet, and covered with confusion. Then it came out that the
 hedgehog was not theirs, but the property of a schoolmate, one Petroff, who had
 given them some money to buy Schlosser's History for him, from another schoolfe
llow who at that moment was driven to raising money by the sale of his books. Co
lia and Kostia were about to make this purchase for their friend when chance bro
ught the hedgehog to their notice, and they had succumbed to the temptation of b
uying it. They were now taking Petroff the hedgehog and hatchet which they had b
ought with his money, instead of Schiosser's History. But Aglaya so entreated th
em that at last they consented to sell her the hedgehog. As soon as she had got 
possession of it, she put it in a wicker basket with Colia's help, and covered i
t with a napkin. Then she said to Colia: "Go and take this hedgehog to the princ
e from me, and ask him to accept it as a token of my profound respect." Colia jo
yfully promised to do the errand, but he demanded explanations.
   "What does the hedgehog mean? What is the meaning of such a present?" Aglaya 
replied that it was none of his business. " I am sure that there is some allegor
y about it," Colia persisted.
   Aglaya grew angry, and called him "a silly boy." "If I did not respect all wo
men in your person," replied Colia, "and if my own principles would permit it, I
 would soon prove to you, that I know how to answer such an insult!" But, in the
 end, Colia went off with the hedgehog in great delight, followed by Kostia Lebe
deff. Aglaya's annoyance was soon over, and seeing that Colia was swinging the h
edgehog's basket violently to and fro, she called out to him from the verandah, 
as if they had never quarrelled: "Colia, dear, please take care not to drop him!
"
   Colia appeared to have no grudge against her, either, for he stopped, and ans
wered most cordially: "No, I will not drop him!
   Don't be afraid, Aglaya Ivanovna!" After which he went on his way. Aglaya bur
st out laughing and ran up to her room, highly delighted. Her good spirits laste
d the whole day.
   All this filled poor Lizabetha's mind with chaotic confusion.
   What on earth did it all mean? The most disturbing feature was the hedgehog. 
What was the symbolic signification of a hedgehog?
   What did they understand by it? What underlay it? Was it a cryptic message?
   Poor General Epanchin "put his foot in it" by answering the above questions i
n his own way. He said there was no cryptic message at all. As for the hedgehog,
 it was just a hedgehog, which meant nothing-unless, indeed, it was a pledge of 
friendship,-the sign of forgetting of offences and so on. At all events, it was 
a joke, and, of course, a most pardonable and innocent one.
   We may as well remark that the general had guessed perfectly accurately.
   The prince, returning home from the interview with Aglaya, had sat gloomy and
 depressed for half an hour. He was almost in despair when Colia arrived with th
e hedgehog.
   Then the sky cleared in a moment. The prince seemed to arise from the dead; h
e asked Colia all about it, made him repeat the story over and over again, and l
aughed and shook hands with the boys in his delight.
   It seemed clear to the prince that Aglaya forgave him, and that he might go t
here again this very evening; and in his eyes that was not only the main thing, 
but everything in the world.
   "What children we are still, Colia!" he cried at last, enthusiastically,-"and
 how delightful it is that we can be children still!"
   "Simply-my dear prince,-simply she is in love with you,-that's the whole of t
he secret!" replied Colia, with authority.
   The prince blushed, but this time he said nothing. Colia burst out laughing a
nd clapped his hands. A minute later the prince laughed too, and from this momen
t until the evening he looked at his watch every other minute to see how much ti
me he had to wait before evening came.
   But the situation was becoming rapidly critical.
   Mrs. Epanchin could bear her suspense no longer, and in spite of the oppositi
on of husband and daughters, she sent for Aglaya, determined to get a straightfo
rward answer out of her, once for all.
   "Otherwise," she observed hysterically, "I shall die before evening."
   It was only now that everyone realized to what a ridiculous deadlock the whol
e matter had been brought. Excepting feigned surprise, indignation, laughter, an
d jeering-both at the prince and at everyone who asked her questions,-nothing co
uld be got out of Aglaya.
   Lizabetha Prokofievna went to bed and only rose again in time for tea, when t
he prince might be expected.
   She awaited him in trembling agitation; and when he at last arrived she nearl
y went off into hysterics.
   Muishkin himself came in very timidly. He seemed to feel his way, and looked 
in each person's eyes in a questioning way,-for Aglaya was absent, which fact al
armed him at once.
   This evening there were no strangers present-no one but the immediate members
 of the family. Prince S. was still in town, occupied with the affairs of Evgeni
e Pavlovitch's uncle.
   "I wish at least HE would come and say something!" complained poor Lizabetha 
Prokofievna.
   The general sat still with a most preoccupied air. The sisters were looking v
ery serious and did not speak a word, and Lizabetha Prokofievna did not know how
 to commence the conversation.
   At length she plunged into an energetic and hostile criticism of railways, an
d glared at the prince defiantly.
   Alas Aglaya still did not come-and the prince was quite lost. He had the grea
test difficulty in expressing his opinion that railways were most useful institu
tions,-and in the middle of his speech Adelaida laughed, which threw him into a 
still worse state of confusion.
   At this moment in marched Aglaya, as calm and collected as could be. She gave
 the prince a ceremonious bow and solemnly took up a prominent position near the
 big round table. She looked at the prince questioningly.
   All present realized that the moment for the settlement of perplexities had a
rrived.
   "Did you get my hedgehog?" she inquired, firmly and almost angrily.
   Yes, I got it," said the prince, blushing.
   "Tell us now, at once, what you made of the present? I must have you answer t
his question for mother's sake; she needs pacifying, and so do all the rest of t
he family!"
   "Look here, Aglaya-" began the general.
   "This-this is going beyond all limits!" said Lizabetha Prokofievna, suddenly 
alarmed.
   "It is not in the least beyond all limits, mamma!" said her daughter, firmly.
 "I sent the prince a hedgehog this morning, and I wish to hear his opinion of i
t. Go on, prince."
   "What-what sort of opinion, Aglaya Ivanovna?"
   "About the hedgehog."
   "That is-I suppose you wish to know how I received the hedgehog, Aglaya Ivano
vna,-or, I should say, how I regarded your sending him to me? In that case, I ma
y tell you-in a word-that I-in fact-"
   He paused, breathless.
   "Come-you haven't told us much!" said Aglaya, after waiting some five seconds
. "Very well, I am ready to drop the hedgehog, if you like; but I am anxious to 
be able to clear up this accumulation of misunderstandings. Allow me to ask you,
 prince,-I wish to hear from you, personally-are you making me an offer, or not?
"
   "Gracious heavens!" exclaimed Lizabetha Prokofievna. The prince started. The 
general stiffened in his chair; the sisters frowned.
   "Don't deceive me now, prince-tell the truth. All these people persecute me w
ith astounding questions-about you. Is there any ground for all these questions,
 or not? Come!"
   "I have not asked you to marry me yet, Aglaya Ivanovna," said the prince, bec
oming suddenly animated; "but you know yourself how much I love you and trust yo
u."
   "No-I asked you this-answer this! Do you intend to ask for my band, or not?"
   "Yes-I do ask for it!" said the prince, more dead than alive now.
   There was a general stir in the room.
   "No-no-my dear girl," began the general. "You cannot proceed like this, Aglay
a, if that's how the matter stands. It's impossible. Prince, forgive it, my dear
 fellow, but-Lizabetha Prokofievna!"-he appealed to his spouse for help-"you mus
t really-"
   "Not I-not I! I retire from all responsibility," said Lizabetha Prokofievna, 
with a wave of the hand.
   "Allow me to speak, please, mamma," said Aglaya. "I think I ought to have som
ething to say in the matter. An important moment of my destiny is about to be de
cided"-(this is how Aglaya expressed herself)-"and I wish to find out how the ma
tter stands, for my own sake, though I am glad you are all here. Allow me to ask
 you, prince, since you cherish those intentions, how you consider that you will
 provide for my happiness?"
   "I-I don't quite know how to answer your question, Aglaya Ivanovna. What is t
here to say to such a question? And-and must I answer?"
   "I think you are rather overwhelmed and out of breath. Have a little rest, an
d try to recover yourself. Take a glass of water, or-but they'll give you some t
ea directly."
   "I love you, Aglaya Ivanovna,-I love you very much. I love only you-and-pleas
e don't jest about it, for I do love you very much."
   "Well, this matter is important. We are not children-we must look into it tho
roughly. Now then, kindly tell me-what does your fortune consist of?"
   "No-Aglaya-come, enough of this, you mustn't behave like this," said her fath
er, in dismay.
   "It's disgraceful," said Lizabetha Prokofievna in a loud whisper.
   "She's mad-quite!" said Alexandra.
   "Fortune-money-do you mean?" asked the prince in some surprise.
   "Just so."
   "I have now-let's see-I have a hundred and thirty-five thousand roubles," sai
d the prince, blushing violently.
   "Is that all, really?" said Aglaya, candidly, without the slightest show of c
onfusion. "However, it's not so bad, especially if managed with economy. Do you 
intend to serve?"
   "I-I intended to try for a certificate as private tutor."
   "Very good. That would increase our income nicely. Have you any intention of 
being a Kammer-junker?"
   "A Kammer-junker? I had not thought of it, but-"
   But here the two sisters could restrain themselves no longer, and both of the
m burst into irrepressible laughter.
   Adelaida had long since detected in Aglaya's features the gathering signs of 
an approaching storm of laughter, which she restrained with amazing self-control
.
   Aglaya looked menacingly at her laughing sisters, but could not contain herse
lf any longer, and the next minute she too had burst into an irrepressible, and 
almost hysterical, fit of mirth. At length she jumped up, and ran out of the roo
m.
   "I knew it was all a joke!" cried Adelaida. "I felt it ever since-since the h
edgehog."
   "No, no! I cannot allow this,-this is a little too much," cried Lizabetha Pro
kofievna, exploding with rage, and she rose from her seat and followed Aglaya ou
t of the room as quickly as she could.
   The two sisters hurriedly went after her.
   The prince and the general were the only two persons left in the room.
   "It's-it's really-now could you have imagined anything like it, Lef Nicolaiev
itch?" cried the general. He was evidently so much agitated that he hardly knew 
what he wished to say. "Seriously now, seriously I mean-"
   "I only see that Aglaya Ivanovna is laughing at me," said the poor prince, sa
dly.
   "Wait a bit, my boy, I'll just go-you stay here, you know. But do just explai
n, if you can, Lef Nicolaievitch, how in the world has all this come about? And 
what does it all mean? You must understand, my dear fellow; I am a father, you s
ee, and I ought to be allowed to understand the matter-do explain, I beg you!"
   "I love Aglaya Ivanovna-she knows it,-and I think she must have long known it
."
   The general shrugged his shoulders.
   "Strange-it's strange," he said, "and you love her very much?"
   "Yes, very much."
   "Well-it's all most strange to me. That is-my dear fellow, it is such a surpr
ise-such a blow-that You see, it is not your financial position (though I should 
not object if you were a bit richer)-I am thinking of my daughter's happiness, o
f course, and the thing is-are you able to give her the happiness she deserves? 
And then-is all this a joke on her part, or is she in earnest? I don't mean on y
our side, but on hers."
   At this moment Alexandra's voice was heard outside the door, calling out "Pap
a!"
   "Wait for me here, my boy-will you? Just wait and think it all over, and I'll
 come back directly," he said hurriedly, and made off with what looked like the 
rapidity of alarm in response to Alexandra's call.
   He found the mother and daughter locked in one another's arms, mingling their
 tears.
   These were the tears of joy and peace and reconciliation. Aglaya was kissing 
her mother's lips and cheeks and hands; they were hugging each other in the most
 ardent way.
   "There, look at her now-Ivan Fedorovitch! Here she is-all of her! This is our
 REAL Aglaya at last!" said Lizabetha Prokofievna.
   Aglaya raised her happy, tearful face from her mother's breast, glanced at he
r father, and burst out laughing. She sprang at him and hugged him too, and kiss
ed him over and over again. She then rushed back to her mother and hid her face 
in the maternal bosom, and there indulged in more tears. Her mother covered her 
with a corner of her shawl.
   "Oh, you cruel little girl! How will you treat us all next, I wonder?" she sa
id, but she spoke with a ring of joy in her voice, and as though she breathed at
 last without the oppression which she had felt so long.
   "Cruel?" sobbed Aglaya. "Yes, I AM cruel, and worthless, and spoiled-tell fat
her so,-oh, here he is-I forgot Father, listen!" She laughed through her tears.
   "My darling, my little idol," cried the general, kissing and fondling her han
ds (Aglaya did not draw them away); "so you love this young man, do you?"
   "No, no, no, can't BEAR him, I can't BEAR your young man!" cried Aglaya, rais
ing her head. "And if you dare say that ONCE more, papa-I'm serious, you know, I
'm,-do you hear me-I'm serious!"
   She certainly did seem to be serious enough. She had flushed up all over and 
her eyes were blazing.
   The general felt troubled and remained silent, while Lizabetha Prokofievna te
legraphed to him from behind Aglaya to ask no questions.
   "If that's the case, darling-then, of course, you shall do exactly as you lik
e. He is waiting alone downstairs. Hadn't I better hint to him gently that he ca
n go?" The general telegraphed to Lizabetha Prokofievna in his turn.
   "No, no, you needn't do anything of the sort; you mustn't hint gently at all.
 I'll go down myself directly. I wish to apologize to this young man, because I 
hurt his feelings."
   "Yes, SERIOUSLY," said the general, gravely.
   "Well, you'd better stay here, all of you, for a little, and I'll go down to 
him alone to begin with. I'll just go in and then you can follow me almost at on
ce. That's the best way."
   She had almost reached the door when she turned round again.
   "I shall laugh-I know I shall; I shall die of laughing," she said, lugubrious
ly.
   However, she turned and ran down to the prince as fast as her feet could carr
y her.
   "Well, what does it all mean? What do you make of it?" asked the general of h
is spouse, hurriedly.
   "I hardly dare say," said Lizabetha, as hurriedly, "but I think it's as plain
 as anything can be."
   "I think so too, as clear as day; she loves him."
   "Loves him? She is head over ears in love, that's what she is," put in Alexan
dra.
   "Well, God bless her, God bless her, if such is her destiny," said Lizabetha,
 crossing herself devoutly.
   "H'm destiny it is," said the general, "and there's no getting out of destiny
."
   With these words they all moved off towards the drawing-room, where another s
urprise awaited them. Aglaya had not only not laughed, as she had feared, but ha
d gone to the prince rather timidly, and said to him:
   "Forgive a silly, horrid, spoilt girl"-(she took his hand here)-"and be quite
 assured that we all of us esteem you beyond all words. And if I dared to turn y
our beautiful, admirable simplicity to ridicule, forgive me as you would a littl
e child its mischief. Forgive me all my absurdity of just now, which, of course,
 meant nothing, and could not have the slightest consequence." She spoke these w
ords with great emphasis.
   Her father, mother, and sisters came into the room and were much struck with 
the last words, which they just caught as they entered-"absurdity which of cours
e meant nothing"-and still more so with the emphasis with which Aglaya had spoke
n.
   They exchanged glances questioningly, but the prince did not seem to have und
erstood the meaning of Aglaya's words; he was in the highest heaven of delight.
   "Why do you speak so?" he murmured. "Why do you ask my forgiveness?"
   He wished to add that he was unworthy of being asked for forgiveness by her, 
but paused. Perhaps he did understand Aglaya's sentence about "absurdity which m
eant nothing," and like the strange fellow that he was, rejoiced in the words.
   Undoubtedly the fact that he might now come and see Aglaya as much as he plea
sed again was quite enough to make him perfectly happy; that he might come and s
peak to her, and see her, and sit by her, and walk with her-who knows, but that 
all this was quite enough to satisfy him for the whole of his life, and that he 
would desire no more to the end of time? (Lizabetha Prokofievna felt that this m
ight be the case, and she didn't like it; though very probably she could not hav
e put the idea into words.) It would be difficult to describe the animation and 
high spirits which distinguished the prince for the rest of the evening.
   He was so happy that "it made one feel happy to look at him," as Aglaya's sis
ters expressed it afterwards. He talked, and told stories just as he had done on
ce before, and never since, namely on the very first morning of his acquaintance
 with the Epanchins, six months ago. Since his return to Petersburg from Moscow,
 he had been remarkably silent, and had told Prince S. on one occasion, before e
veryone, that he did not think himself justified in degrading any thought by his
 unworthy words.
   But this evening he did nearly all the talking himself, and told stories by t
he dozen, while he answered all questions put to him clearly, gladly, and with a
ny amount of detail.
   There was nothing, however, of love-making in his talk. His ideas were all of
 the most serious kind; some were even mystical and profound.
   He aired his own views on various matters, some of his most private opinions 
and observations, many of which would have seemed rather funny, so his hearers a
greed afterwards, had they not been so well expressed.
   The general liked serious subjects of conversation; but both he and Lizabetha
 Prokofievna felt that they were having a little too much of a good thing tonigh
t, and as the evening advanced, they both grew more or less melancholy; but towa
rds night, the prince fell to telling funny stories, and was always the first to
 burst out laughing himself, which he invariably did so joyously and simply that
 the rest laughed just as much at him as at his stories.
   As for Aglaya, she hardly said a word all the evening; but she listened with 
all her ears to Lef Nicolaievitch's talk, and scarcely took her eyes off him.
   "She looked at him, and stared and stared, and hung on every word he said," s
aid Lizabetha afterwards, to her husband, "and yet, tell her that she loves him,
 and she is furious!"
   "What's to be done? It's fate," said the general, shrugging his shoulders, an
d, for a long while after, he continued to repeat:
   "It's fate, it's fate!"
   We may add that to a business man like General Epanchin the present position 
of affairs was most unsatisfactory. He hated the uncertainty in which they had b
een, perforce, left. However, he decided to say no more about it, and merely to 
look on, and take his time and tune from Lizabetha Prokofievna.
   The happy state in which the family had spent the evening, as just recorded, 
was not of very long duration. Next day Aglaya quarrelled with the prince again,
 and so she continued to behave for the next few days. For whole hours at a time
 she ridiculed and chaffed the wretched man, and made him almost a laughingstock
.
   It is true that they used to sit in the little summer-house together for an h
our or two at a time, very often, but it was observed that on these occasions th
e prince would read the paper, or some book, aloud to Aglaya.
   "Do you know," Aglaya said to him once, interrupting the reading,
   "I've remarked that you are dreadfully badly educated. You never know anythin
g thoroughly, if one asks you; neither anyone's name, nor dates, nor about treat
ies and so on. It's a great pity, you know!"
   "I told you I had not had much of an education," replied the prince.
   "How am I to respect you, if that's the case? Read on now. No-don't! Stop rea
ding!"
   And once more, that same evening, Aglaya mystified them all.
   Prince S. had returned, and Aglaya was particularly amiable to him, and asked
 a great deal after Evgenie Pavlovitch. (Muishkin had not come in as yet.) Sudde
nly Prince S. hinted something about "a new and approaching change in the family
." He was led to this remark by a communication inadvertently made to him by Liz
abetha Prokofievna, that Adelaida's marriage must be postponed a little longer, 
in order that the two weddings might come off together.
   It is impossible to describe Aglaya's irritation. She flared up, and said som
e indignant words about "all these silly insinuations." She added that "she had 
no intentions as yet of replacing anybody's mistress."
   These words painfully impressed the whole party; but especially her parents. 
Lizabetha Prokofievna summoned a secret council of two, and insisted upon the ge
neral's demanding from the prince a full explanation of his relations with Nasta
sia Philipovna. The general argued that it was only a whim of Aglaya's; and that
, had not Prince S. unfortunately made that remark, which had confused the child
 and made her blush, she never would have said what she did; and that he was sur
e Aglaya knew well that anything she might have heard of the prince and Nastasia
 Philipovna was merely the fabrication of malicious tongues, and that the woman 
was going to marry Rogojin. He insisted that the prince had nothing whatever to 
do with Nastasia Philipovna, so far as any liaison was concerned; and, if the tr
uth were to be told about it, he added, never had had.
   Meanwhile nothing put the prince out, and he continued to be in the seventh h
eaven of bliss. Of course he could not fail to observe some impatience and ill-t
emper in Aglaya now and then; but he believed in something else, and nothing cou
ld now shake his conviction. Besides, Aglaya's frowns never lasted long; they di
sappeared of themselves.
   Perhaps he was too easy in his mind. So thought Hippolyte, at all events, who
 met him in the park one day.
   "Didn't I tell you the truth now, when I said you were in love?" he said, com
ing up to Muishkin of his own accord, and stopping him.
   The prince gave him his hand and congratulated him upon "looking so well."
   Hippolyte himself seemed to be hopeful about his state of health, as is often
 the case with consumptives.
   He had approached the prince with the intention of talking sarcastically abou
t his happy expression of face, but very soon forgot his intention and began to 
talk about himself. He began complaining about everything, disconnectedly and en
dlessly, as was his wont.
   "You wouldn't believe," he concluded, "how irritating they all are there. The
y are such wretchedly small, vain, egotistical, COMMONPLACE people! Would you be
lieve it, they invited me there under the express condition that I should die qu
ickly, and they are all as wild as possible with me for not having died yet, and
 for being, on the contrary, a good deal better! Isn't it a comedy? I don't mind
 betting that you don't believe me!"
   The prince said nothing.
   "I sometimes think of coming over to you again," said Hippolyte, carelessly. 
"So you DON'T think them capable of inviting a man on the condition that he is t
o look sharp and die?"
   "I certainly thought they invited you with quite other views."
   "Ho, ho! you are not nearly so simple as they try to make you out! This is no
t the time for it, or I would tell you a thing or two about that beauty, Gania, 
and his hopes. You are being undermined, pitilessly undermined, and-and it is re
ally melancholy to see you so calm about it. But alas! it's your nature-you can'
t help it!"
   "My word! what a thing to be melancholy about! Why, do you think I should be 
any happier if I were to feel disturbed about the excavations you tell me of?"
   "It is better to be unhappy and know the worst, than to be happy in a fool's 
paradise! I suppose you don't believe that you have a rival in that quarter?"
   "Your insinuations as to rivalry are rather cynical, Hippolyte.
   I'm sorry to say I have no right to answer you! As for Gania, I put it to you
, CAN any man have a happy mind after passing through what he has had to suffer?
 I think that is the best way to look at it. He will change yet, he has lots of 
time before him, and life is rich; besides-besides" the prince hesitated. "As to 
being undermined, I don't know what in the world you are driving at, Hippolyte. 
I think we had better drop the subject!"
   "Very well, we'll drop it for a while. You can't look at anything but in your
 exalted, generous way. You must put out your finger and touch a thing before yo
u'll believe it, eh? Ha! ha! ha! I suppose you despise me dreadfully, prince, eh
? What do you think?"
   "Why? Because you have suffered more than we have?"
   "No; because I am unworthy of my sufferings, if you like!"
   "Whoever CAN suffer is worthy to suffer, I should think. Aglaya Ivanovna wish
ed to see you, after she had read your confession, but-"
   "She postponed the pleasure-I see-I quite understand!" said Hippolyte, hurrie
dly, as though he wished to banish the subject.
   "I hear-they tell me-that you read her all that nonsense aloud?
   Stupid @ bosh it was-written in delirium. And I can't understand how anyone c
an be so I won't say CRUEL, because the word would be humiliating to myself, but
 we'll say childishly vain and revengeful, as to REPROACH me with this confessio
n, and use it as a weapon against me. Don't be afraid, I'm not referring to your
self."
   "Oh, but I'm sorry you repudiate the confession, Hippolyte-it is sincere; and
, do you know, even the absurd parts of it-and these are many" (here Hippolyte f
rowned savagely) "are, as it were, redeemed by suffering-for it must have cost y
ou something to admit what you there say-great torture, perhaps, for all I know.
   Your motive must have been a very noble one all through. Whatever may have ap
peared to the contrary, I give you my word, I see this more plainly every day. I
 do not judge you; I merely say this to have it off my mind, and I am only sorry
 that I did not say it all THEN-"
   Hippolyte flushed hotly. He had thought at first that the prince was "humbugg
ing" him; but on looking at his face he saw that he was absolutely serious, and 
had no thought of any deception.
   Hippolyte beamed with gratification.
   "And yet I must die," he said, and almost added: "a man like me @ "And imagin
e how that Gania annoys me! He has developed the idea -or pretends to believe-th
at in all probability three or four others who heard my confession will die befo
re I do. There's an idea for you-and all this by way of CONSOLING me! Ha! ha! ha
! In the first place they haven't died yet; and in the second, if they DID die-a
ll of them-what would be the satisfaction to me in that? He judges me by himself
. But he goes further, he actually pitches into me because, as he declares, 'any
 decent fellow' would die quietly, and that 'all this' is mere egotism on my par
t. He doesn't see what refinement of egotism it is on his own part-and at the sa
me time, what ox-like coarseness! Have you ever read of the death of one Stepan 
Gleboff, in the eighteenth century? I read of it yesterday by chance."
   "Who was he?"
   He was impaled on a stake in the time of Peter."
   "I know, I know! He lay there fifteen hours in the hard frost, and died with 
the most extraordinary fortitude-I know-what of him?"
   "Only that God gives that sort of dying to some, and not to others. Perhaps y
ou think, though, that I could not die like Gleboff?"
   "Not at all!" said the prince, blushing. "I was only going to say that you-no
t that you could not be like Gleboff-but that you would have been more like @ "I
 guess what you mean-I should be an Osterman, not a Gleboff-eh? Is that what you
 meant?"
   "What Osterman?" asked the prince in some surprise.
   "Why, Osterman-the diplomatist. Peter's Osterman," muttered Hippolyte, confus
ed. There was a moment's pause of mutual confusion.
   Oh, no, no!" said the prince at last, "that was not what I was going to say-o
h no! I don't think you would ever have been like Osterman."
   Hippolyte frowned gloomily.
   "I'll tell you why I draw the conclusion," explained the prince, evidently de
sirous of clearing up the matter a little. "Because, though I often think over t
he men of those times, I cannot for the life of me imagine them to be like ourse
lves. It really appears to me that they were of another race altogether than our
selves of today. At that time people seemed to stick so to one idea; now, they a
re more nervous, more sensitive, more enlightened-people of two or three ideas a
t once-as it were.
   The man of today is a broader man, so to speak-and I declare I believe that i
s what prevents him from being so self-contained and independent a being as his 
brother of those earlier days. Of course my remark was only made under this impr
ession, and not in the least @ "I quite understand. You are trying to comfort me
 for the naiveness with which you disagreed with me-eh? Ha! ha! ha! You are a re
gular child, prince! However, I cannot help seeing that you always treat me like
-like a fragile china cup. Never mind, never mind, I'm not a bit angry! At all e
vents we have had a very funny talk. Do you know, all things considered, I shoul
d like to be something better than Osterman! I wouldn't take the trouble to rise
 from the dead to be an Osterman. However, I see I must make arrangements to die
 soon, or I myself-. Well-leave me now! Au revoir. Look here-before you go, just
 give me your opinion: how do you think I ought to die, now? I mean-the best, th
e most virtuous way? Tell me!"
   "You should pass us by and forgive us our happiness," said the prince in a lo
w voice.
   "Ha! ha! ha! I thought so. I thought I should hear something like that. Well,
 you are-you really are-oh dear me! Eloquence, eloquence! Good-bye!"
      VI.
   As to the evening party at the Epanchins' at which Princess Bielokonski was t
o be present, Varia had reported with accuracy; though she had perhaps expressed
 herself too strongly.
   The thing was decided in a hurry and with a certain amount of quite unnecessa
ry excitement, doubtless because "nothing could be done in this house like anywh
ere else."
   The impatience of Lizabetha Prokofievna "to get things settled" explained a g
ood deal, as well as the anxiety of both parents for the happiness of their belo
ved daughter. Besides, Princess Bielokonski was going away soon, and they hoped 
that she would take an interest in the prince. They were anxious that he should 
enter society under the auspices of this lady, whose patronage was the best of r
ecommendations for any young man.
   Even if there seems something strange about the match, the general and his wi
fe said to each other, the "world" will accept Aglaya's fiance without any quest
ion if he is under the patronage of the princess. In any case, the prince would 
have to be "shown" sooner or later; that is, introduced into society, of which h
e had, so far, not the least idea. Moreover, it was only a question of a small g
athering of a few intimate friends. Besides Princess Bielokonski, only one other
 lady was expected, the wife of a high dignitary. Evgenie Pavlovitch, who was to
 escort the princess, was the only young man.
   Muishkin was told of the princess's visit three days beforehand, but nothing 
was said to him about the party until the night before it was to take place.
   He could not help observing the excited and agitated condition of all members
 of the family, and from certain hints dropped in conversation he gathered that 
they were all anxious as to the impression he should make upon the princess. But
 the Epanchins, one and all, believed that Muishkin, in his simplicity of mind, 
was quite incapable of realizing that they could be feeling any anxiety on his a
ccount, and for this reason they all looked at him with dread and uneasiness.
   In point of fact, he did attach marvellously little importance to the approac
hing event. He was occupied with altogether different thoughts. Aglaya was growi
ng hourly more capricious and gloomy, and this distressed him. When they told hi
m that Evgenie Pavlovitch was expected, he evinced great delight, and said that 
he had long wished to see him-and somehow these words did not please anyone.
   Aglaya left the room in a fit of irritation, and it was not until late in the
 evening, past eleven, when the prince was taking his departure, that she said a
 word or two to him, privately, as she accompanied him as far as the front door.
   "I should like you," she said, "not to come here tomorrow until evening, when
 the guests are all assembled. You know there are to be guests, don't you?"
   She spoke impatiently and with severity; this was the first allusion she had 
made to the party of tomorrow.
   She hated the idea of it, everyone saw that; and she would probably have like
d to quarrel about it with her parents, but pride and modesty prevented her from
 broaching the subject.
   The prince jumped to the conclusion that Aglaya, too, was nervous about him, 
and the impression he would make, and that she did not like to admit her anxiety
; and this thought alarmed him.
   "Yes, I am invited," he replied.
   She was evidently in difficulties as to how best to go on. "May I speak of so
mething serious to you, for once in my life?" she asked, angrily. She was irrita
ted at she knew not what, and could not restrain her wrath.
   "Of course you may; I am very glad to listen," replied Muishkin.
   Aglaya was silent a moment and then began again with evident dislike of her s
ubject:
   "I do not wish to quarrel with them about this; in some things they won't be 
reasonable. I always did feel a loathing for the laws which seem to guide mamma'
s conduct at times. I don't speak of father, for he cannot be expected to be any
thing but what he is. Mother is a noble-minded woman, I know; you try to suggest
 anything mean to her, and you'll see! But she is such a slave to these miserabl
e creatures! I don't mean old Bielokonski alone.
   She is a contemptible old thing, but she is able to twist people round her li
ttle finger, and I admire that in her, at all events!
   How mean it all is, and how foolish! We were always middle-class, thoroughly 
middle-class, people. Why should we attempt to climb into the giddy heights of t
he fashionable world? My sisters are all for it. It's Prince S. they have to tha
nk for poisoning their minds. Why are you so glad that Evgenie Pavlovitch is com
ing?"
   "Listen to me, Aglaya," said the prince, "I do believe you are nervous lest I
 shall make a fool of myself tomorrow at your party?"
   "Nervous about you?" Aglaya blushed. "Why should I be nervous about you? What
 would it matter to me if you were to make ever such a fool of yourself? How can
 you say such a thing? What do you mean by 'making a fool of yourself'? What a v
ulgar expression! I suppose you intend to talk in that sort of way tomorrow even
ing? Look up a few more such expressions in your dictionary; do, you'll make a g
rand effect! I'm sorry that you seem to be able to come into a room as gracefull
y as you do; where did you learn the art? Do you think you can drink a cup of te
a decently, when you know everybody is looking at you, on purpose to see how you
 do it?"
   "Yes, I think I can."
   "Can you? I'm sorry for it then, for I should have had a good laugh at you ot
herwise. Do break SOMETHING at least, in the drawing-room! Upset the Chinese vas
e, won't you? It's a valuable one; DO break it. Mamma values it, and she'll go o
ut of her mind-it was a present. She'll cry before everyone, you'll see! Wave yo
ur hand about, you know, as you always do, and just smash it.
   Sit down near it on purpose."
   "On the contrary, I shall sit as far from it as I can. Thanks for the hint."
   "Ha, ha! Then you are afraid you WILL wave your arms about! I wouldn't mind b
etting that you'll talk about some lofty subject, something serious and learned.
 How delightful, how tactful that will be!"
   "I should think it would be very foolish indeed, unless it happened to come i
n appropriately."
   "Look here, once for all," cried Aglaya, boiling over, "if I hear you talking
 about capital punishment, or the economical condition of Russia, or about Beaut
y redeeming the world, or anything of that sort, I'll-well, of course I shall la
ugh and seem very pleased, but I warn you beforehand, don't look me in the face 
again! I'm serious now, mind, this time I AM REALLY serious." She certainly did 
say this very seriously, so much so, that she looked quite different from what s
he usually was, and the prince could not help noticing the fact. She did not see
m to be joking in the slightest degree.
   "Well, you've put me into such a fright that I shall certainly make a fool of
 myself, and very likely break something too. I wasn't a bit alarmed before, but
 now I'm as nervous as can be."
   "Then don't speak at all. Sit still and don't talk."
   "Oh, I can't do that, you know! I shall say something foolish out of pure 'fu
nk,' and break something for the same excellent reason; I know I shall. Perhaps 
I shall slip and fall on the slippery floor; I've done that before now, you know
. I shall dream of it all night now. Why did you say anything about it?"
   Aglaya looked blackly at him.
   "Do you know what, I had better not come at all tomorrow! I'll plead sick-lis
t and stay away," said the prince, with decision.
   Aglaya stamped her foot, and grew quite pale with anger.
   Oh, my goodness! Just listen to that! 'Better not come,' when the party is on
 purpose for him! Good Lord! What a delightful thing it is to have to do with su
ch a-such a stupid as you are!"
   "Well, I'll come, I'll come," interrupted the prince, hastily,
   "and I'll give you my word of honour that I will sit the whole evening and no
t say a word."
   "I believe that's the best thing you can do. You said you'd 'plead sick-list'
 just now; where in the world do you get hold of such expressions? Why do you ta
lk to me like this? Are you trying to irritate me, or what?"
   "Forgive me, it's a schoolboy expression. I won't do it again. I know quite w
ell, I see it, that you are anxious on my account (now, don't be angry), and it 
makes me very happy to see it. You wouldn't believe how frightened I am of misbe
having somehow, and how glad I am of your instructions. But all this panic is si
mply nonsense, you know, Aglaya! I give you my word it is; I am so pleased that 
you are such a child, such a dear good child. How CHARMING you can be if you lik
e, Aglaya."
   Aglaya wanted to be angry, of course, but suddenly some quite unexpected feel
ing seized upon her heart, all in a moment.
   "And you won't reproach me for all these rude words of mine-some day-afterwar
ds?" she asked, of a sudden.
   "What an idea! Of course not. And what are you blushing for again? And there 
comes that frown once more! You've taken to looking too gloomy sometimes, Aglaya
, much more than you used to.
   I know why it is."
   "Be quiet, do be quiet!"
   "No, no, I had much better speak out. I have long wished to say it, and HAVE 
said it, but that's not enough, for you didn't believe me. Between us two there 
stands a being who-"
   "Be quiet, be quiet, be quiet, be quiet!" Aglaya struck in, suddenly, seizing
 his hand in hers, and gazing at him almost in terror.
   At this moment she was called by someone. She broke loose from him with an ai
r of relief and ran away.
   The prince was in a fever all night. It was strange, but he had suffered from
 fever for several nights in succession. On this particular night, while in semi
-delirium, he had an idea: what if on the morrow he were to have a fit before ev
erybody? The thought seemed to freeze his blood within him. All night he fancied
 himself in some extraordinary society of strange persons. The worst of it was t
hat he was talking nonsense; he knew that he ought not to speak at all, and yet 
he talked the whole time; he seemed to be trying to persuade them all to somethi
ng. Evgenie and Hippolyte were among the guests, and appeared to be great friend
s.
   He awoke towards nine o'clock with a headache, full of confused ideas and str
ange impressions. For some reason or other he felt most anxious to see Rogojin, 
to see and talk to him, but what he wished to say he could not tell. Next, he de
termined to go and see Hippolyte. His mind was in a confused state, so much so t
hat the incidents of the morning seemed to be imperfectly realized, though acute
ly felt.
   One of these incidents was a visit from Lebedeff. Lebedeff came rather early-
before ten-but he was tipsy already. Though the prince was not in an observant c
ondition, yet he could not avoid seeing that for at least three days-ever since 
General Ivolgin had left the house Lebedeff had been behaving very badly. He loo
ked untidy and dirty at all times of the day, and it was said that he had begun 
to rage about in his own house, and that his temper was very bad. As soon as he 
arrived this morning, he began to hold forth, beating his breast and apparently 
blaming himself for something.
   "I've-I've had a reward for my meanness-I've had a slap in the face," he conc
luded, tragically.
   "A slap in the face? From whom? And so early in the morning?"
   "Early?" said Lebedeff, sarcastically. "Time counts for nothing, even in phys
ical chastisement; but my slap in the face was not physical, it was moral."
   He suddenly took a seat, very unceremoniously, and began his story. It was ve
ry disconnected; the prince frowned, and wished he could get away; but suddenly 
a few words struck him. He sat stiff with wonder-Lebedeff said some extraordinar
y things.
   In the first place he began about some letter; the name of Aglaya Ivanovna ca
me in. Then suddenly he broke off and began to accuse the prince of something; h
e was apparently offended with him. At first he declared that the prince had tru
sted him with his confidences as to "a certain person" (Nastasia Philipovna), bu
t that of late his friendship had been thrust back into his bosom, and his innoc
ent question as to "approaching family changes" had been curtly put aside, which
 Lebedeff declared, with tipsy tears, he could not bear; especially as he knew s
o much already both from Rogojin and Nastasia Philipovna and her friend, and fro
m Varvara Ardalionovna, and even from Aglaya Ivanovna, through his daughter Vera
. "And who told Lizabetha Prokofievna something in secret, by letter? Who told h
er all about the movements of a certain person called Nastasia Philipovna? Who w
as the anonymous person, eh? Tell me!"
   "Surely not you?" cried the prince.
   "Just so," said Lebedeff, with dignity; "and only this very morning I have se
nt up a letter to the noble lady, stating that I have a matter of great importan
ce to communicate. She received the letter; I know she got it; and she received 
ME, too."
   "Have you just seen Lizabetha Prokofievna?" asked the prince, scarcely believ
ing his ears.
   "Yes, I saw her, and got the said slap in the face as mentioned.
   She chucked the letter back to me unopened, and kicked me out of the house, m
orally, not physically, although not far off it."
   "What letter do you mean she returned unopened?"
   "What! didn't I tell you? Ha, ha, ha! I thought I had. Why, I received a lett
er, you know, to be handed over-"From whom? To whom?"
   But it was difficult, if not impossible, to extract anything from Lebedeff. A
ll the prince could gather was, that the letter had been received very early, an
d had a request written on the outside that it might be sent on to the address g
iven.
   "Just as before, sir, just as before! To a certain person, and from a certain
 hand. The individual's name who wrote the letter is to be represented by the le
tter A.-"
   "What? Impossible! To Nastasia Philipovna? Nonsense!" cried the prince.
   "It was, I assure you, and if not to her then to Rogojin, which is the same t
hing. Mr. Hippolyte has had letters, too, and all from the individual whose name
 begins with an A.," smirked Lebedeff, with a hideous grin.
   As he kept jumping from subject to subject, and forgetting what he had begun 
to talk about, the prince said nothing, but waited, to give him time.
   It was all very vague. Who had taken the letters, if letters there were? Prob
ably Vera-and how could Lebedeff have got them?
   In all probability, he had managed to steal the present letter from Vera, and
 had himself gone over to Lizabetha Prokofievna with some idea in his head. So t
he prince concluded at last.
   "You are mad!" he cried, indignantly.
   "Not quite, esteemed prince," replied Lebedeff, with some acerbity. "I confes
s I thought of doing you the service of handing the letter over to yourself, but
 I decided that it would pay me better to deliver it up to the noble lady afores
aid, as I had informed her of everything hitherto by anonymous letters; so when 
I sent her up a note from myself, with the letter, you know, in order to fix a m
eeting for eight o'clock this morning, I signed it 'your secret correspondent.' 
They let me in at once-very quickly-by the back door, and the noble lady receive
d me."
   "Well? Go on."
   "Oh, well, when I saw her she almost punched my head, as I say; in fact so ne
arly that one might almost say she did punch my head. She threw the letter in my
 face; she seemed to reflect first, as if she would have liked to keep it, but t
hought better of it and threw it in my face instead. 'If anybody can have been s
uch a fool as to trust a man like you to deliver the letter,' says she,' take it
 and deliver it! 'Hey! she was grandly indignant. A fierce, fiery lady that, sir
!"
   "Where's the letter now?"
   "Oh, I've still got it, here!"
   And he handed the prince the very letter from Aglaya to Gania, which the latt
er showed with so much triumph to his Sister at a later hour.
   "This letter cannot be allowed to remain in your hands."
   "It's for you-for you! I've brought it you on purpose!" cried Lebedeff, excit
edly. "Why, I'm yours again now, heart and hand, your slave; there was but a mom
entary pause in the flow of my love and esteem for you. Mea culpa, mea culpa! as
 the Pope of Rome says.
   "This letter should be sent on at once," said the prince, disturbed. "I'll ha
nd it over myself."
   "Wouldn't it be better, esteemed prince, wouldn't it be better-to-don't you k
now-"
   Lebedeff made a strange and very expressive grimace; he twisted about in his 
chair, and did something, apparently symbolical, with his hands.
   "What do you mean?" said the prince.
   "Why, open it, for the time being, don't you know?" he said, most confidentia
lly and mysteriously.
   The prince jumped up so furiously that Lebedeff ran towards the door; having 
gained which strategic position, however, he stopped and looked back to see if h
e might hope for pardon.
   "Oh, Lebedeff, Lebedeff! Can a man really sink to such depths of meanness?" s
aid the prince, sadly.
   Lebedeff's face brightened.
   "Oh, I'm a mean wretch-a mean wretch!" he said, approaching the prince once m
ore, and beating his breast, with tears in his eyes.
   "It's abominable dishonesty, you know!"
   "Dishonesty-it is, it is! That's the very word!"
   "What in the world induces you to act so? You are nothing but a spy. Why did 
you write anonymously to worry so noble and generous a lady? Why should not Agla
ya Ivanovna write a note to whomever she pleases? What did you mean to complain 
of today? What did you expect to get by it? What made you go at all?"
   "Pure amiable curiosity,-I assure you-desire to do a service.
   That's all. Now I'm entirely yours again, your slave; hang me if you like!"
   "Did you go before Lizabetha Prokofievna in your present condition?" inquired
 the prince.
   "No-oh no, fresher-more the correct card. I only became this like after the h
umiliation I suffered there,
   "Well-that'll do; now leave me."
   This injunction had to be repeated several times before the man could be pers
uaded to move. Even then he turned back at the door, came as far as the middle o
f the room, and there went through his mysterious motions designed to convey the
 suggestion that the prince should open the letter. He did not dare put his sugg
estion into words again.
   After this performance, he smiled sweetly and left the room on tiptoe.
   All this had been very painful to listen to. One fact stood out certain and c
lear, and that was that poor Aglaya must be in a state of great distress and ind
ecision and mental torment ("from jealousy," the prince whispered to himself). U
ndoubtedly in this inexperienced, but hot and proud little head, there were all 
sorts of plans forming, wild and impossible plans, maybe; and the idea of this s
o frightened the prince that he could not make up his mind what to do. Something
 must be done, that was clear.
   He looked at the address on the letter once more. Oh, he was not in the least
 degree alarmed about Aglaya writing such a letter; he could trust her. What he 
did not like about it was that he could not trust Gania.
   However, he made up his mind that he would himself take the note and deliver 
it. Indeed, he went so far as to leave the house and walk up the road, but chang
ed his mind when he had nearly reached Ptitsin's door. However, he there luckily
 met Colia, and commissioned him to deliver the letter to his brother as if dire
ct from Aglaya. Colia asked no questions but simply delivered it, and Gania cons
equently had no suspicion that it had passed through so many hands.
   Arrived home again, the prince sent for Vera Lebedeff and told her as much as
 was necessary, in order to relieve her mind, for she had been in a dreadful sta
te of anxiety since she had missed the letter. She heard with horror that her fa
ther had taken it.
   Muishkin learned from her that she had on several occasions performed secret 
missions both for Aglaya and for Rogojin, without, however, having had the sligh
test idea that in so doing she might injure the prince in any way.
   The latter, with one thing and another, was now so disturbed and confused, th
at when, a couple of hours or so later, a message came from Colia that the gener
al was ill, he could hardly take the news in.
   However, when he did master the fact, it acted upon him as a tonic by complet
ely distracting his attention. He went at once to Nina Alexandrovna's, whither t
he general had been carried, and stayed there until the evening. He could do no 
good, but there are people whom to have near one is a blessing at such times.
   Colia was in an almost hysterical state; he cried continuously, but was runni
ng about all day, all the same; fetching doctors, of whom he collected three; go
ing to the chemist's, and so on.
   The general was brought round to some extent, but the doctors declared that h
e could not be said to be out of danger. Varia and Nina Alexandrovna never left 
the sick man's bedside; Gania was excited and distressed, but would not go upsta
irs, and seemed afraid to look at the patient. He wrung his hands when the princ
e spoke to him, and said that "such a misfortune at such a moment" was terrible.
   The prince thought he knew what Gania meant by "such a moment."
   Hippolyte was not in the house. Lebedeff turned up late in the afternoon; he 
had been asleep ever since his interview with the prince in the morning. He was 
quite sober now, and cried with real sincerity over the sick general-mourning fo
r him as though he were his own brother. He blamed himself aloud, but did not ex
plain why. He repeated over and over again to Nina Alexandrovna that he alone wa
s to blame-no one else-but that he had acted out of "pure amiable curiosity," an
d that "the deceased," as he insisted upon calling the still living general, had
 been the greatest of geniuses.
   He laid much stress on the genius of the sufferer, as if this idea must be on
e of immense solace in the present crisis.
   Nina Alexandrovna-seeing his sincerity of feeling-said at last, and without t
he faintest suspicion of reproach in her voice:
   "Come, come-don't cry! God will forgive you!"
   Lebedeff was so impressed by these words, and the tone in which they were spo
ken, that he could not leave Nina Alexandrovna all the evening-in fact, for seve
ral days. Till the general's death, indeed, he spent almost all his time at his 
side.
   Twice during the day a messenger came to Nina Alexandrovna from the Epanchins
 to inquire after the invalid.
   When-late in the evening-the prince made his appearance in Lizabetha Prokofie
vna's drawing-room, he found it full of guests.
   Mrs. Epanchin questioned him very fully about the general as soon as he appea
red; and when old Princess Bielokonski wished to know "who this general was, and
 who was Nina Alexandrovna," she proceeded to explain in a manner which pleased 
the prince very much.
   He himself, when relating the circumstances of the general's illness to Lizab
etha Prokofievna, "spoke beautifully," as Aglaya's sisters declared afterwards-"
modestly, quietly, without gestures or too many words, and with great dignity." 
He had entered the room with propriety and grace, and he was perfectly dressed; 
he not only did not "fall down on the slippery floor," as he had expressed it, b
ut evidently made a very favourable impression upon the assembled guests.
   As for his own impression on entering the room and taking his seat, he instan
tly remarked that the company was not in the least such as Aglaya's words had le
d him to fear, and as he had dreamed of-in nightmare form-all night.
   This was the first time in his life that he had seen a little corner of what 
was generally known by the terrible name of "society." He had long thirsted, for
 reasons of his own, to penetrate the mysteries of the magic circle, and, theref
ore, this assemblage was of the greatest possible interest to him.
   His first impression was one of fascination. Somehow or other he felt that al
l these people must have been born on purpose to be together! It seemed to him t
hat the Epanchins were not having a party at all; that these people must have be
en here always, and that he himself was one of them-returned among them after a 
long absence, but one of them, naturally and indisputably.
   It never struck him that all this refined simplicity and nobility and wit and
 personal dignity might possibly be no more than an exquisite artistic polish. T
he majority of the guests-who were somewhat empty-headed, after all, in spite of
 their aristocratic bearing-never guessed, in their self-satisfied composure, th
at much of their superiority was mere veneer, which indeed they had adopted unco
nsciously and by inheritance.
   The prince would never so much as suspect such a thing in the delight of his 
first impression.
   He saw, for instance, that one important dignitary, old enough to be his gran
dfather, broke off his own conversation in order to listen to HIM-a young and in
experienced man; and not only listened, but seemed to attach value to his opinio
n, and was kind and amiable, and yet they were strangers and had never seen each
 other before. Perhaps what most appealed to the prince's impressionability was 
the refinement of the old man's courtesy towards him. Perhaps the soil of his su
sceptible nature was really predisposed to receive a pleasant impression.
   Meanwhile all these people-though friends of the family and of each other to 
a certain extent-were very far from being such intimate friends of the family an
d of each other as the prince concluded. There were some present who never would
 think of considering the Epanchins their equals. There were even some who hated
 one another cordially. For instance, old Princess Bielokonski had all her life 
despised the wife of the "dignitary," while the latter was very far from loving 
Lizabetha Prokofievna. The dignitary himself had been General Epanchin's protect
or from his youth up; and the general considered him so majestic a personage tha
t he would have felt a hearty contempt for himself if he had even for one moment
 allowed himself to pose as the great man's equal, or to think of him-in his fea
r and reverence-as anything less than an Olympic God! There were others present 
who had not met for years, and who had no feeling whatever for each other, unles
s it were dislike; and yet they met tonight as though they had seen each other b
ut yesterday in some friendly and intimate assembly of kindred spirits.
   It was not a large party, however. Besides Princess Bielokonski and the old d
ignitary (who was really a great man) and his wife, there was an old military ge
neral-a count or baron with a German name, a man reputed to possess great knowle
dge and administrative ability. He was one of those Olympian administrators who 
know everything except Russia, pronounce a word of extraordinary wisdom, admired
 by all, about once in five years, and, after being an eternity in the service, 
generally die full of honour and riches, though they have never done anything gr
eat, and have even been hostile to all greatness. This general was Ivan Fedorovi
tch's immediate superior in the service; and it pleased the latter to look upon 
him also as a patron. On the other hand, the great man did not at all consider h
imself Epanchin's patron.
   He was always very cool to him, while taking advantage of his ready services,
 and would instantly have put another in his place if there had been the slighte
st reason for the change.
   Another guest was an elderly, important-looking gentleman, a distant relative
 of Lizabetha Prokofievna's. This gentleman was rich, held a good position, was 
a great talker, and had the reputation of being "one of the dissatisfied," thoug
h not belonging to the dangerous sections of that class. He had the manners, to 
some extent, of the English aristocracy, and some of their tastes (especially in
 the matter of under-done roast beef, harness, men-servants, etc.). He was a gre
at friend of the dignitary's, and Lizabetha Prokofievna, for some reason or othe
r, had got hold of the idea that this worthy intended at no distant date to offe
r the advantages of his hand and heart to Alexandra.
   Besides the elevated and more solid individuals enumerated, there were presen
t a few younger though not less elegant guests.
   Besides Prince S. and Evgenie Pavlovitch, we must name the eminent and fascin
ating Prince N.-once the vanquisher of female hearts all over Europe. This gentl
eman was no longer in the first bloom of youth-he was forty-five, but still very
 handsome. He was well off, and lived, as a rule, abroad, and was noted as a goo
d teller of stories. Then came a few guests belonging to a lower stratum of soci
ety-people who, like the Epanchins themselves, moved only occasionally in this e
xalted sphere. The Epanchins liked to draft among their more elevated guests a f
ew picked representatives of this lower stratum, and Lizabetha Prokofievna recei
ved much praise for this practice, which proved, her friends said, that she was 
a woman of tact. The Epanchins prided themselves upon the good opinion people he
ld of them.
   One of the representatives of the middle-class present today was a colonel of
 engineers, a very serious man and a great friend of Prince S., who had introduc
ed him to the Epanchins. He was extremely silent in society, and displayed on th
e forefinger of his right hand a large ring, probably bestowed upon him for serv
ices of some sort. There was also a poet, German by name, but a Russian poet; ve
ry presentable, and even handsome-the sort of man one could bring into society w
ith impunity. This gentleman belonged to a German family of decidedly bourgeois 
origin, but he had a knack of acquiring the patronage of "big-wigs," and of reta
ining their favour. He had translated some great German poem into Russian verse,
 and claimed to have been a friend of a famous Russian poet, since dead. (It is 
strange how great a multitude of literary people there are who have had the adva
ntages of friendship with some great man of their own profession who is, unfortu
nately, dead.) The dignitary's wife had introduced this worthy to the Epanchins.
 This lady posed as the patroness of literary people, and she certainly had succ
eeded in obtaining pensions for a few of them, thanks to her influence with thos
e in authority on such matters. She was a lady of weight in her own way. Her age
 was about forty-five, so that she was a very young wife for such an elderly hus
band as the dignitary. She had been a beauty in her day and still loved, as many
 ladies of forty-five do love, to dress a little too smartly. Her intellect was 
nothing to boast of, and her literary knowledge very doubtful. Literary patronag
e was, however, with her as much a mania as was the love of gorgeous clothes. Ma
ny books and translations were dedicated to her by her proteges, and a few of th
ese talented individuals had published some of their own letters to her, upon ve
ry weighty subjects.
   This, then, was the society that the prince accepted at once as true coin, as
 pure gold without alloy.
   It so happened, however, that on this particular evening all these good peopl
e were in excellent humour and highly pleased with themselves. Every one of them
 felt that they were doing the Epanchins the greatest possible honour by their p
resence. But alas! the prince never suspected any such subtleties! For instance,
 he had no suspicion of the fact that the Epanchins, having in their mind so imp
ortant a step as the marriage of their daughter, would never think of presuming 
to take it without having previously "shown off" the proposed husband to the dig
nitary-the recognized patron of the family. The latter, too, though he would pro
bably have received news of a great disaster to the Epanchin family with perfect
 composure, would nevertheless have considered it a personal offence if they had
 dared to marry their daughter without his advice, or we might almost say, his l
eave.
   The amiable and undoubtedly witty Prince N. could not but feel that he was as
 a sun, risen for one night only to shine upon the Epanchin drawing-room. He acc
ounted them immeasurably his inferiors, and it was this feeling which caused his
 special amiability and delightful ease and grace towards them. He knew very wel
l that he must tell some story this evening for the edification of the company, 
and led up to it with the inspiration of anticipatory triumph.
   The prince, when he heard the story afterwards, felt that he had never yet co
me across so wonderful a humorist, or such remarkable brilliancy as was shown by
 this man; and yet if he had only known it, this story was the oldest, stalest, 
and most worn-out yarn, and every drawing-room in town was sick to death of it. 
It was only in the innocent Epanchin household that it passed for a new and bril
liant tale-as a sudden and striking reminiscence of a splendid and talented man.
   Even the German poet, though as amiable as possible, felt that he was doing t
he house the greatest of honours by his presence in it.
   But the prince only looked at the bright side; he did not turn the coat and s
ee the shabby lining.
   Aglaya had not foreseen that particular calamity. She herself looked wonderfu
lly beautiful this evening. All three sisters were dressed very tastefully, and 
their hair was done with special care.
   Aglaya sat next to Evgenie Pavlovitch, and laughed and talked to him with an 
unusual display of friendliness. Evgenie himself behaved rather more sedately th
an usual, probably out of respect to the dignitary. Evgenie had been known in so
ciety for a long while. He had appeared at the Epanchins' today with crape on hi
s hat, and Princess Bielokonski had commended this action on his part. Not every
 society man would have worn crape for "such an uncle." Lizabetha Prokofievna ha
d liked it also, but was too preoccupied to take much notice. The prince remarke
d that Aglaya looked attentively at him two or three times, and seemed to be sat
isfied with his behaviour.
   Little by little he became very happy indeed. All his late anxieties and appr
ehensions (after his conversation with Lebedeff) now appeared like so many bad d
reams-impossible, and even laughable.
   He did not speak much, only answering such questions as were put to him, and 
gradually settled down into unbroken silence, listening to what went on, and ste
eped in perfect satisfaction and contentment.
   Little by little a sort of inspiration, however, began to stir within him, re
ady to spring into life at the right moment. When he did begin to speak, it was 
accidentally, in response to a question, and apparently without any special obje
ct.
      VII.
   WHILE he feasted his eyes upon Aglaya, as she talked merrily with Evgenie and
 Prince N., suddenly the old anglomaniac, who was talking to the dignitary in an
other corner of the room, apparently telling him a story about something or othe
r-suddenly this gentleman pronounced the name of "Nicolai Andreevitch Pavlicheff
" aloud. The prince quickly turned towards him, and listened.
   The conversation had been on the subject of land, and the present disorders, 
and there must have been something amusing said, for the old man had begun to la
ugh at his companion's heated expressions.
   The latter was describing in eloquent words how, in consequence of recent leg
islation, he was obliged to sell a beautiful estate in the N. province, not beca
use he wanted ready money-in fact, he was obliged to sell it at half its value. 
"To avoid another lawsuit about the Pavlicheff estate, I ran away," he said. "Wi
th a few more inheritances of that kind I should soon be ruined!"
   At this point General Epanchin, noticing how interested Muishkin had become i
n the conversation, said to him, in a low tone:
   "That gentleman-Ivan Petrovitch-is a relation of your late friend, Mr. Pavlic
heff. You wanted to find some of his relations, did you not?"
   The general, who had been talking to his chief up to this moment, had observe
d the prince's solitude and silence, and was anxious to draw him into the conver
sation, and so introduce him again to the notice of some of the important person
ages.
   "Lef Nicolaievitch was a ward of Nicolai Andreevitch Pavlicheff, after the de
ath of his own parents," he remarked, meeting Ivan Petrovitch's eye.
   "Very happy to meet him, I'm sure," remarked the latter. "I remember Lef Nico
laievitch well. When General Epanchin introduced us just now, I recognized you a
t once, prince. You are very little changed, though I saw you last as a child of
 some ten or eleven years old. There was something in your features, I suppose, 
that-"
   "You saw me as a child!" exclaimed the prince, with surprise.
   "Oh! yes, long ago," continued Ivan Petrovitch, "while you were living with m
y cousin at Zlatoverhoff. You don't remember me? No, I dare say you don't; you h
ad some malady at the time, I remember. It was so serious that I was surprised-"
   "No; I remember nothing!" said the prince. A few more words of explanation fo
llowed, words which were spoken without the smallest excitement by his companion
, but which evoked the greatest agitation in the prince; and it was discovered t
hat two old ladies to whose care the prince had been left by Pavlicheff, and who
 lived at Zlatoverhoff, were also relations of Ivan Petrovitch.
   The latter had no idea and could give no information as to why Pavlicheff had
 taken so great an interest in the little prince, his ward.
   "In point of fact I don't think I thought much about it," said the old fellow
. He seemed to have a wonderfully good memory, however, for he told the prince a
ll about the two old ladies, Pavlicheff's cousins, who had taken care of him, an
d whom, he declared, he had taken to task for being too severe with the prince a
s a small sickly boy-the elder sister, at least; the younger had been kind, he r
ecollected. They both now lived in another province, on a small estate left to t
hem by Pavlicheff.
   The prince listened to all this with eyes sparkling with emotion and delight.
   He declared with unusual warmth that he would never forgive himself for havin
g travelled about in the central provinces during these last six months without 
having hunted up his two old friends.
   He declared, further, that he had intended to go every day, but had always be
en prevented by circumstances; but that now he would promise himself the pleasur
e-however far it was, he would find them out. And so Ivan Petrovitch REALLY knew
 Natalia Nikitishna!-what a saintly nature was hers!-and Martha Nikitishna! Ivan
 Petrovitch must excuse him, but really he was not quite fair on dear old Martha
. She was severe, perhaps; but then what else could she be with such a little id
iot as he was then? (Ha, ha.) He really was an idiot then, Ivan Petrovitch must 
know, though he might not believe it. (Ha, ha.) So he had really seen him there!
   Good heavens! And was he really and truly and actually a cousin of Pavlicheff
's?
   "I assure you of it," laughed Ivan Petrovitch, gazing amusedly at the prince.
   "Oh! I didn't say it because I DOUBT the fact, you know. (Ha, ha.) How could 
I doubt such a thing? (Ha, ha, ha.) I made the remark because-because Nicolai An
dreevitch Pavlicheff was such a splendid man, don't you see! Such a high-souled 
man, he really was, I assure you."
   The prince did not exactly pant for breath, but he "seemed almost to CHOKE ou
t of pure simplicity and goodness of heart," as Adelaida expressed it, on talkin
g the party over with her fiance, the Prince S., next morning.
   "But, my goodness me," laughed Ivan Petrovitch, "why can't I be cousin to eve
n a splendid man?"
   "Oh, dear!" cried the prince, confused, trying to hurry his words out, and gr
owing more and more eager every moment: "I've gone and said another stupid thing
. I don't know what to say. I-I didn't mean that, you know-I-I-he really was suc
h a splendid man, wasn't he?"
   The prince trembled all over. Why was he so agitated? Why had he flown into s
uch transports of delight without any apparent reason? He had far outshot the me
asure of joy and emotion consistent with the occasion. Why this was it would be 
difficult to say.
   He seemed to feel warmly and deeply grateful to someone for something or othe
r-perhaps to Ivan Petrovitch; but likely enough to all the guests, individually,
 and collectively. He was much too happy.
   Ivan Petrovitch began to stare at him with some surprise; the dignitary, too,
 looked at him with considerable attention;
   Princess Bielokonski glared at him angrily, and compressed her lips. Prince N
., Evgenie, Prince S., and the girls, all broke off their own conversations and 
listened. Aglaya seemed a little startled; as for Lizabetha Prokofievna, her hea
rt sank within her.
   This was odd of Lizabetha Prokofievna and her daughters. They had themselves 
decided that it would be better if the prince did not talk all the evening. Yet 
seeing him sitting silent and alone, but perfectly happy, they had been on the p
oint of exerting themselves to draw him into one of the groups of talkers around
 the room. Now that he was in the midst of a talk they became more than ever anx
ious and perturbed.
   "That he was a splendid man is perfectly true; you are quite right," repeated
 Ivan Petrovitch, but seriously this time. "He was a fine and a worthy fellow-wo
rthy, one may say, of the highest respect," he added, more and more seriously at
 each pause; " and it is agreeable to see, on your part, such-"
   "Wasn't it this same Pavlicheff about whom there was a strange story in conne
ction with some abbot? I don't remember who the abbot was, but I remember at one
 time everybody was talking about it," remarked the old dignitary.
   "Yes-Abbot Gurot, a Jesuit," said Ivan Petrovitch. "Yes, that's the sort of t
hing our best men are apt to do. A man of rank, too, and rich-a man who, if he h
ad continued to serve, might have done anything; and then to throw up the servic
e and everything else in order to go over to Roman Catholicism and turn Jesuit-o
penly, too-almost triumphantly. By Jove! it was positively a mercy that he died 
when he did-it was indeed-everyone said so at the time."
   The prince was beside himself.
   "Pavlicheff?-Pavlicheff turned Roman Catholic? Impossible!" he cried, in horr
or.
   "H'm! impossible is rather a strong word," said Ivan Petrovitch.
   "You must allow, my dear prince However, of course you value the memory of the
 deceased so very highly; and he certainly was the kindest of men; to which fact
, by the way, I ascribe, more than to anything else, the success of the abbot in
 influencing his religious convictions. But you may ask me, if you please, how m
uch trouble and worry I, personally, had over that business, and especially with
 this same Gurot! Would you believe it," he continued, addressing the dignitary,
 "they actually tried to put in a claim under the deceased's will, and I had to 
resort to the very strongest measures in order to bring them to their senses? I 
assure you they knew their cue, did these gentlemen-wonderful! Thank goodness al
l this was in Moscow, and I got the Court, you know, to help me, and we soon bro
ught them to their senses.
   "You wouldn't believe how you have pained and astonished me," cried the princ
e.
   "Very sorry; but in point of fact, you know, it was all nonsense and would ha
ve ended in smoke, as usual-I'm sure of that. Last year,"-he turned to the old m
an again,-"Countess K. joined some Roman Convent abroad. Our people never seem t
o be able to offer any resistance so soon as they get into the hands of these-in
triguers-especially abroad."
   "That is all thanks to our lassitude, I think," replied the old man, with aut
hority. "And then their way of preaching; they have a skilful manner of doing it
! And they know how to startle one, too. I got quite a fright myself in '32, in 
Vienna, I assure you; but I didn't cave in to them, I ran away instead, ha, ha!"
   "Come, come, I've always heard that you ran away with the beautiful Countess 
Levitsky that time-throwing up everything in order to do it-and not from the Jes
uits at all," said Princess Bielokonski, suddenly.
   "Well, yes-but we call it from the Jesuits, you know; it comes to the same th
ing," laughed the old fellow, delighted with the pleasant recollection.
   "You seem to be very religious," he continued, kindly, addressing the prince,
" which is a thing one meets so seldom nowadays among young people."
   The prince was listening open-mouthed, and still in a condition of excited ag
itation. The old man was evidently interested in him, and anxious to study him m
ore closely.
   "Pavlicheff was a man of bright intellect and a good Christian, a sincere Chr
istian," said the prince, suddenly. "How could he possibly embrace a faith which
 is unchristian? Roman Catholicism is, so to speak, simply the same thing as unc
hristianity," he added with flashing eyes, which seemed to take in everybody in 
the room.
   "Come, that's a little TOO strong, isn't it?" murmured the old man, glancing 
at General Epanchin in surprise.
   "How do you make out that the Roman Catholic religion is UNCHRISTIAN? What is
 it, then?" asked Ivan Petrovitch, turning to the prince.
   "It is not a Christian religion, in the first place," said the latter, in ext
reme agitation, quite out of proportion to the necessity of the moment. "And in 
the second place, Roman Catholicism is, in my opinion, worse than Atheism itself
. Yes-that is my opinion. Atheism only preaches a negation, but Romanism goes fu
rther; it preaches a disfigured, distorted Christ-it preaches Anti-Christ-I assu
re you, I swear it! This is my own personal conviction, and it has long distress
ed me. The Roman Catholic believes that the Church on earth cannot stand without
 universal temporal Power. He cries 'non possumus!' In my opinion the Roman Cath
olic religion is not a faith at all, but simply a continuation of the Roman Empi
re, and everything is subordinated to this idea-beginning with faith. The Pope h
as seized territories and an earthly throne, and has held them with the sword. A
nd so the thing has gone on, only that to the sword they have added lying, intri
gue, deceit, fanaticism, superstition, swindling;-they have played fast and loos
e with the most sacred and sincere feelings of men;-they have exchanged everythi
ng-everything for money, for base earthly POWER! And is this not the teaching of
 Anti-Christ? How could the upshot of all this be other than Atheism? Atheism is
 the child of Roman Catholicism-it proceeded from these Romans themselves, thoug
h perhaps they would not believe it. It grew and fattened on hatred of its paren
ts; it is the progeny of their lies and spiritual feebleness. Atheism! In our co
untry it is only among the upper classes that you find unbelievers; men who have
 lost the root or spirit of their faith; but abroad whole masses of the people a
re beginning to profess unbelief-at first because of the darkness and lies by wh
ich they were surrounded; but now out of fanaticism, out of loathing for the Chu
rch and Christianity!"
   The prince paused to get breath. He had spoken with extraordinary rapidity, a
nd was very pale.
   All present interchanged glances, but at last the old dignitary burst out lau
ghing frankly. Prince N. took out his eye-glass to have a good look at the speak
er. The German poet came out of his corner and crept nearer to the table, with a
 spiteful smile.
   "You exaggerate the matter very much," said Ivan Petrovitch, with rather a bo
red air. "There are, in the foreign Churches, many representatives of their fait
h who are worthy of respect and esteem."
   "Oh, but I did not speak of individual representatives. I was merely talking 
about Roman Catholicism, and its essence-of Rome itself. A Church can never enti
rely disappear; I never hinted at that!"
   "Agreed that all this may be true; but we need not discuss a subject which be
longs to the domain of theology."
   "Oh, no; oh, no! Not to theology alone, I assure you! Why, Socialism is the p
rogeny of Romanism and of the Romanistic spirit. It and its brother Atheism proc
eed from Despair in opposition to Catholicism. It seeks to replace in itself the
 moral power of religion, in order to appease the spiritual thirst of parched hu
manity and save it; not by Christ, but by force.
   'Don't dare to believe in God, don't dare to possess any individuality, any p
roperty! Fraternite ou la Mort; two million heads. 'By their works ye shall know
 them'-we are told. And we must not suppose that all this is harmless and withou
t danger to ourselves. Oh, no; we must resist, and quickly, quickly! We must let
 out Christ shine forth upon the Western nations, our Christ whom we have preser
ved intact, and whom they have never known.
   Not as slaves, allowing ourselves to be caught by the hooks of the Jesuits, b
ut carrying our Russian civilization to THEM, we must stand before them, not let
ting it be said among us that their preaching is 'skilful,' as someone expressed
 it just now."
   "But excuse me, excuse me;" cried Ivan Petrovitch considerably disturbed, and
 looking around uneasily. "Your ideas are, of course, most praiseworthy, and in 
the highest degree patriotic; but you exaggerate the matter terribly. It would b
e better if we dropped the subject."
   "No, sir, I do not exaggerate, I understate the matter, if anything, undoubte
dly understate it; simply because I cannot express myself as I should like, but-
"
   "Allow me!"
   The prince was silent. He sat straight up in his chair and gazed fervently at
 Ivan Petrovitch.
   "It seems to me that you have been too painfully impressed by the news of wha
t happened to your good benefactor," said the old dignitary, kindly, and with th
e utmost calmness of demeanour.
   "You are excitable, perhaps as the result of your solitary life.
   If you would make up your mind to live more among your fellows in society, I 
trust, I am sure, that the world would be glad to welcome you, as a remarkable y
oung man; and you would soon find yourself able to look at things more calmly. Y
ou would see that all these things are much simpler than you think; and, besides
, these rare cases come about, in my opinion, from ennui and from satiety."
   "Exactly, exactly! That is a true thought!" cried the prince.
   "From ennui, from our ennui but not from satiety! Oh, no, you are wrong there
! Say from THIRST if you like; the thirst of fever!
   And please do not suppose that this is so small a matter that we may have a l
augh at it and dismiss it; we must be able to foresee our disasters and arm agai
nst them. We Russians no sooner arrive at the brink of the water, and realize th
at we are really at the brink, than we are so delighted with the outlook that in
 we plunge and swim to the farthest point we can see. Why is this?
   You say you are surprised at Pavlicheff's action; you ascribe it to madness, 
to kindness of heart, and what not, but it is not so.
   "Our Russian intensity not only astonishes ourselves; all Europe wonders at o
ur conduct in such cases! For, if one of us goes over to Roman Catholicism, he i
s sure to become a Jesuit at once, and a rabid one into the bargain. If one of u
s becomes an Atheist, he must needs begin to insist on the prohibition of faith 
in God by force, that is, by the sword. Why is this? Why does he then exceed all
 bounds at once? Because he has found land at last, the fatherland that he sough
t in vain before; and, because his soul is rejoiced to find it, he throws himsel
f upon it and kisses it!
   Oh, it is not from vanity alone, it is not from feelings of vanity that Russi
ans become Atheists and Jesuits! But from spiritual thirst, from anguish of long
ing for higher things, for dry firm land, for foothold on a fatherland which the
y never believed in because they never knew it. It is easier for a Russian to be
come an Atheist, than for any other nationality in the world. And not only does 
a Russian 'become an Atheist,' but he actually BELIEVES IN Atheism, just as thou
gh he had found a new faith, not perceiving that he has pinned his faith to a ne
gation. Such is our anguish of thirst! 'Whoso has no country has no God.' That i
s not my own expression; it is the expression of a merchant, one of the Old Beli
evers, whom I once met while travelling. He did not say exactly these words. I t
hink his expression was:
   "'Whoso forsakes his country forsakes his God.' "But let these thirsty Russia
n souls find, like Columbus' discoverers, a new world; let them find the Russian
 world, let them search and discover all the gold and treasure that lies hid in 
the bosom of their own land! Show them the restitution of lost humanity, in the 
future, by Russian thought alone, and by means of the God and of the Christ of o
ur Russian faith, and you will see how mighty and just and wise and good a giant
 will rise up before the eyes of the astonished and frightened world; astonished
 because they expect nothing but the sword from us, because they think they will
 get nothing out of us but barbarism.
   This has been the case up to now, and the longer matters go on as they are no
w proceeding, the more clear will be the truth of what I say; and I-"
   But at this moment something happened which put a most unexpected end to the 
orator's speech. All this heated tirade, this outflow of passionate words and ec
static ideas which seemed to hustle and tumble over each other as they fell from
 his lips, bore evidence of some unusually disturbed mental condition in the you
ng fellow who had "boiled over" in such a remarkable manner, without any apparen
t reason.
   Of those who were present, such as knew the prince listened to his outburst i
n a state of alarm, some with a feeling of mortification. It was so unlike his u
sual timid self-constraint; so inconsistent with his usual taste and tact, and w
ith his instinctive feeling for the higher proprieties. They could not understan
d the origin of the outburst; it could not be simply the news of Pavlicheff's pe
rversion. By the ladies the prince was regarded as little better than a lunatic,
 and Princess Bielokonski admitted afterwards that "in another minute she would 
have bolted."
   The two old gentlemen looked quite alarmed. The old general (Epanchin's chief
) sat and glared at the prince in severe displeasure. The colonel sat immovable.
 Even the German poet grew a little pale, though he wore his usual artificial sm
ile as he looked around to see what the others would do.
   In point of fact it is quite possible that the matter would have ended in a v
ery commonplace and natural way in a few minutes. The undoubtedly astonished, bu
t now more collected, General Epanchin had several times endeavoured to interrup
t the prince, and not having succeeded he was now preparing to take firmer and m
ore vigorous measures to attain his end. In another minute or two he would proba
bly have made up his mind to lead the prince quietly out of the room, on the ple
a of his being ill (and it was more than likely that the general was right in hi
s belief that the prince WAS actually ill), but it so happened that destiny had 
something different in store.
   At the beginning of the evening, when the prince first came into the room, he
 had sat down as far as possible from the Chinese vase which Aglaya had spoken o
f the day before.
   Will it be believed that, after Aglaya's alarming words, an ineradicable conv
iction had taken possession of his mind that, however he might try to avoid this
 vase next day, he must certainly break it? But so it was.
   During the evening other impressions began to awaken in his mind, as we have 
seen, and he forgot his presentiment. But when Pavlicheff was mentioned and the 
general introduced him to Ivan Petrovitch, he had changed his place, and went ov
er nearer to the table; when, it so happened, he took the chair nearest to the b
eautiful vase, which stood on a pedestal behind him, just about on a level with 
his elbow.
   As he spoke his last words he had risen suddenly from his seat with a wave of
 his arm, and there was a general cry of horror.
   The huge vase swayed backwards and forwards; it seemed to be uncertain whethe
r or no to topple over on to the head of one of the old men, but eventually dete
rmined to go the other way, and came crashing over towards the German poet, who 
darted out of the way in terror.
   The crash, the cry, the sight of the fragments of valuable china covering the
 carpet, the alarm of the company-what all this meant to the poor prince it woul
d be difficult to convey to the mind of the reader, or for him to imagine.
   But one very curious fact was that all the shame and vexation and mortificati
on which he felt over the accident were less powerful than the deep impression o
f the almost supernatural truth of his premonition. He stood still in alarm-in a
lmost superstitious alarm, for a moment; then all mists seemed to clear away fro
m his eyes; he was conscious of nothing but light and joy and ecstasy; his breat
h came and went; but the moment passed. Thank God it was not that! He drew a lon
g breath and looked around.
   For some minutes he did not seem to comprehend the excitement around him; tha
t is, he comprehended it and saw everything, but he stood aside, as it were, lik
e someone invisible in a fairy tale, as though he had nothing to do with what wa
s going on, though it pleased him to take an interest in it.
   He saw them gather up the broken bits of china; he heard the loud talking of 
the guests and observed how pale Aglaya looked, and how very strangely she was g
azing at him. There was no hatred in her expression, and no anger whatever. It w
as full of alarm for him, and sympathy and affection, while she looked around at
 the others with flashing, angry eyes. His heart filled with a sweet pain as he 
gazed at her.
   At length he observed, to his amazement, that all had taken their seats again
, and were laughing and talking as though nothing had happened. Another minute a
nd the laughter grew louder-they were laughing at him, at his dumb stupor-laughi
ng kindly and merrily.
   Several of them spoke to him, and spoke so kindly and cordially, especially L
izabetha Prokofievna-she was saying the kindest possible things to him.
   Suddenly he became aware that General Epanchin was tapping him on the shoulde
r; Ivan Petrovitch was laughing too, but still more kind and sympathizing was th
e old dignitary. He took the prince by the hand and pressed it warmly; then he p
atted it, and quietly urged him to recollect himself-speaking to him exactly as 
he would have spoken to a little frightened child, which pleased the prince wond
erfully; and next seated him beside himself.
   The prince gazed into his face with pleasure, but still seemed to have no pow
er to speak. His breath failed him. The old man's face pleased him greatly.
   "Do you really forgive me?" he said at last. "And-and Lizabetha Prokofievna t
oo?" The laugh increased, tears came into the prince's eyes, he could not believ
e in all this kindness-he was enchanted.
   "The vase certainly was a very beautiful one. I remember it here for fifteen 
years-yes, quite that!" remarked Ivan Petrovitch.
   "Oh, what a dreadful calamity! A wretched vase smashed, and a man half dead w
ith remorse about it," said Lizabetha Prokofievna, loudly. "What made you so dre
adfully startled, Lef Nicolaievitch?" she added, a little timidly. "Come, my dea
r boy! cheer up. You really alarm me, taking the accident so to heart."
   "Do you forgive me all-ALL, besides the vase, I mean?" said the prince, risin
g from his seat once more, but the old gentleman caught his hand and drew him do
wn again-he seemed unwilling to let him go.
   "C'est tres-curieux et c'est tres-serieux," he whispered across the table to 
Ivan Petrovitch, rather loudly. Probably the prince heard him.
   "So that I have not offended any of you? You will not believe how happy I am 
to be able to think so. It is as it should be. As if I COULD offend anyone here!
 I should offend you again by even suggesting such a thing."
   "Calm yourself, my dear fellow. You are exaggerating again; you really have n
o occasion to be so grateful to us. It is a feeling which does you great credit,
 but an exaggeration, for all that."
   "I am not exactly thanking you, I am only feeling a growing admiration for yo
u-it makes me happy to look at you. I dare say I am speaking very foolishly, but
 I must speak-I must explain, if it be out of nothing better than self-respect."
   All he said and did was abrupt, confused, feverish-very likely the words he s
poke, as often as not, were not those he wished to say. He seemed to inquire whe
ther he MIGHT speak. His eyes lighted on Princess Bielokonski.
   "All right, my friend, talk away, talk away!" she remarked. "Only don't lose 
your breath; you were in such a hurry when you began, and look what you've come 
to now! Don't be afraid of speaking-all these ladies and gentlemen have seen far
 stranger people than yourself; you don't astonish THEM. You are nothing out-of-
the-way remarkable, you know. You've done nothing but break a vase, and give us 
all a fright."
   The prince listened, smiling.
   "Wasn't it you," he said, suddenly turning to the old gentleman,
   "who saved the student Porkunoff and a clerk called Shoabrin from being sent 
to Siberia, two or three months since?"
   The old dignitary blushed a little, and murmured that the prince had better n
ot excite himself further.
   "And I have heard of YOU," continued the prince, addressing Ivan Petrovitch, 
"that when some of your villagers were burned out you gave them wood to build up
 their houses again, though they were no longer your serfs and had behaved badly
 towards you."
   "Oh, come, come! You are exaggerating," said Ivan Petrovitch, beaming with sa
tisfaction, all the same. He was right, however, in this instance, for the repor
t had reached the prince's ears in an incorrect form.
   "And you, princess," he went on, addressing Princess Bielokonski,
   "was it not you who received me in Moscow, six months since, as kindly as tho
ugh I had been your own son, in response to a letter from Lizabetha Prokofievna;
 and gave me one piece of advice, again as to your own son, which I shall never 
forget? Do you remember?"
   "What are you making such a fuss about?" said the old lady, with annoyance. "
You are a good fellow, but very silly. One gives you a halfpenny, and you are as
 grateful as though one had saved your life. You think this is praiseworthy on y
our part, but it is not -it is not, indeed."
   She seemed to be very angry, but suddenly burst out laughing, quite good-humo
uredly.
   Lizabetha Prokofievna's face brightened up, too; so did that of General Epanc
hin.
   "I told you Lef Nicolaievitch was a man-a man-if only he would not be in such
 a hurry, as the princess remarked," said the latter, with delight.
   Aglaya alone seemed sad and depressed; her face was flushed, perhaps with ind
ignation.
   "He really is very charming," whispered the old dignitary to Ivan Petrovitch.
   "I came into this room with anguish in my heart," continued the prince, with 
ever-growing agitation, speaking quicker and quicker, and with increasing strang
eness. "I-I was afraid of you all, and afraid of myself. I was most afraid of my
self. When I returned to Petersburg, I promised myself to make a point of seeing
 our greatest men, and members of our oldest families-the old families like my o
wn. I am now among princes like myself, am I not? I wished to know you, and it w
as necessary, very, very necessary. I had always heard so much that was evil sai
d of you all-more evil than good; as to how small and petty were your interests,
 how absurd your habits, how shallow your education, and so on. There is so much
 written and said about you! I came here today with anxious curiosity; I wished 
to see for myself and form my own convictions as to whether it were true that th
e whole of this upper stratum of Russian society is WORTHLESS, has outlived its 
time, has existed too long, and is only fit to die-and yet is dying with petty, 
spiteful warring against that which is destined to supersede it and take its pla
ce-hindering the Coming Men, and knowing not that itself is in a dying condition
.
   I did not fully believe in this view even before, for there never was such a 
class among us-excepting perhaps at court, by accident-or by uniform; but now th
ere is not even that, is there? It has vanished, has it not?"
   "No, not a bit of it," said Ivan Petrovitch, with a sarcastic laugh.
   "Good Lord, he's off again!" said Princess Bielokonski, impatiently.
   "Laissez-le dire! He is trembling all over," said the old man, in a warning w
hisper.
   The prince certainly was beside himself.
   "Well? What have I seen?" he continued. "I have seen men of graceful simplici
ty of intellect; I have seen an old man who is not above speaking kindly and eve
n LISTENING to a boy like myself; I see before me persons who can understand, wh
o can forgive-kind, good Russian hearts-hearts almost as kind and cordial as I m
et abroad. Imagine how delighted I must have been, and how surprised! Oh, let me
 express this feeling! I have so often heard, and I have even believed, that in 
society there was nothing but empty forms, and that reality had vanished; but I 
now see for myself that this can never be the case HERE, among us-it may be the 
order elsewhere, but not in Russia. Surely you are not all Jesuits and deceivers
! I heard Prince N.'s story just now.
   Was it not simple-minded, spontaneous humour? Could such words come from the 
lips of a man who is dead?-a man whose heart and talents are dried up? Could dea
d men and women have treated me so kindly as you have all been treating me to-da
y? Is there not material for the future in all this-for hope? Can such people fa
il to UNDERSTAND? Can such men fall away from reality?"
   "Once more let us beg you to be calm, my dear boy. We'll talk of all this ano
ther time-I shall do so with the greatest pleasure, for one," said the old digni
tary, with a smile.
   Ivan Petrovitch grunted and twisted round in his chair. General Epanchin move
d nervously. The latter's chief had started a conversation with the wife of the 
dignitary, and took no notice whatever of the prince, but the old lady very ofte
n glanced at him, and listened to what he was saying.
   "No, I had better speak," continued the prince, with a new outburst of feveri
sh emotion, and turning towards the old man with an air of confidential trustful
ness." Yesterday, Aglaya Ivanovna forbade me to talk, and even specified the par
ticular subjects I must not touch upon-she knows well enough that I am odd when 
I get upon these matters. I am nearly twenty-seven years old, and yet I know I a
m little better than a child. I have no right to express my ideas, and said so l
ong ago. Only in Moscow, with Rogojin, did I ever speak absolutely freely! He an
d I read Pushkin together-all his works. Rogojin knew nothing of Pushkin, had no
t even heard his name. I am always afraid of spoiling a great Thought or Idea by
 my absurd manner. I have no eloquence, I know. I always make the wrong gestures
-inappropriate gestures-and therefore I degrade the Thought, and raise a laugh i
nstead of doing my subject justice. I have no sense of proportion either, and th
at is the chief thing. I know it would be much better if I were always to sit st
ill and say nothing. When I do so, I appear to be quite a sensible sort of a per
son, and what's more, I think about things. But now I must speak; it is better t
hat I should. I began to speak because you looked so kindly at me; you have such
 a beautiful face. I promised Aglaya Ivanovna yesterday that I would not speak a
ll the evening."
   "Really?" said the old man, smiling.
   "But, at times, I can't help thinking that I am. wrong in feeling so about it
, you know. Sincerity is more important than elocution, isn't it?"
   "Sometimes."
   "I want to explain all to you-everything-everything! I know you think me Utop
ian, don't you-an idealist? Oh, no! I'm not, indeed-my ideas are all so simple. 
You don't believe me? You are smiling. Do you know, I am sometimes very wicked-f
or I lose my faith? This evening as I came here, I thought to myself, 'What shal
l I talk about? How am I to begin, so that they may be able to understand partia
lly, at all events?' How afraid I was-dreadfully afraid! And yet, how COULD I be
 afraid-was it not shameful of me? Was I afraid of finding a bottomless abyss of
 empty selfishness? Ah! that's why I am so happy at this moment, because I find 
there is no bottomless abyss at all-but good, healthy material, full of life.
   "It is not such a very dreadful circumstance that we are odd people, is it? F
or we really are odd, you know-careless, reckless, easily wearied of anything. W
e don't look thoroughly into matters-don't care to understand things. We are all
 like this-you and I, and all of them! Why, here are you, now-you are not a bit 
angry with me for calling you odd,' are you? And, if so, surely there is good ma
terial in you? Do you know, I sometimes think it is a good thing to be odd. We c
an forgive one another more easily, and be more humble. No one can begin by bein
g perfect-there is much one cannot understand in life at first. In order to atta
in to perfection, one must begin by failing to understand much. And if we take i
n knowledge too quickly, we very likely are not taking it in at all. I say all t
his to you-you who by this time understand so much-and doubtless have failed to 
understand so much, also. I am not afraid of you any longer. You are not angry t
hat a mere boy should say such words to you, are you? Of course not! You know ho
w to forget and to forgive. You are laughing, Ivan Petrovitch?
   You think I am a champion of other classes of people-that I am THEIR advocate
, a democrat, and an orator of Equality?" The prince laughed hysterically; he ha
d several times burst into these little, short nervous laughs. "Oh, no-it is for
 you, for myself, and for all of us together, that I am alarmed. I am a prince o
f an old family myself, and I am sitting among my peers; and I am talking like t
his in the hope of saving us all; in the hope that our class will not disappear 
altogether-into the darkness-unguessing its danger-blaming everything around it,
 and losing ground every day. Why should we disappear and give place to others, 
when we may still, if we choose, remain in the front rank and lead the battle? L
et us be servants, that we may become lords in due season!"
   He tried to get upon his feet again, but the old man still restrained him, ga
zing at him with increasing perturbation as he went on.
   "Listen-I know it is best not to speak! It is best simply to give a good exam
ple-simply to begin the work. I have done this-I have begun, and-and-oh! CAN any
one be unhappy, really? Oh! what does grief matter-what does misfortune matter, 
if one knows how to be happy? Do you know, I cannot understand how anyone can pa
ss by a green tree, and not feel happy only to look at it! How anyone can talk t
o a man and not feel happy in loving him! Oh, it is my own fault that I cannot e
xpress myself well enough! But there are lovely things at every step I take-thin
gs which even the most miserable man must recognize as beautiful. Look at a litt
le child-look at God's day-dawn-look at the grass growing-look at the eyes that 
love you, as they gaze back into your eyes!"
   He had risen, and was speaking standing up. The old gentleman was looking at 
him now in unconcealed alarm. Lizabetha Prokofievna wrung her hands. "Oh, my God
!" she cried. She had guessed the state of the case before anyone else.
   Aglaya rushed quickly up to him, and was just in time to receive him in her a
rms, and to hear with dread and horror that awful, wild cry as he fell writhing 
to the ground.
   There he lay on the carpet, and someone quickly placed a cushion under his he
ad.
   No one had expected this.
   In a quarter of an hour or so Prince N. and Evgenie Pavlovitch and the old di
gnitary were hard at work endeavouring to restore the harmony of the evening, bu
t it was of no avail, and very soon after the guests separated and went their wa
ys.
   A great deal of sympathy was expressed; a considerable amount of advice was v
olunteered; Ivan Petrovitch expressed his opinion that the young man was "a Slav
ophile, or something of that sort"; but that it was not a dangerous development.
 The old dignitary said nothing.
   True enough, most of the guests, next day and the day after, were not in very
 good humour. Ivan Petrovitch was a little offended, but not seriously so. Gener
al Epanchin's chief was rather cool towards him for some while after the occurre
nce. The old dignitary, as patron of the family, took the opportunity of murmuri
ng some kind of admonition to the general, and added, in flattering terms, that 
he was most interested in Aglaya's future.
   He was a man who really did possess a kind heart, although his interest in th
e prince, in the earlier part of the evening, was due, among other reasons, to t
he latter's connection with Nastasia Philipovna, according to popular report. He
 had heard a good deal of this story here and there, and was greatly interested 
in it, so much so that he longed to ask further questions about it.
   Princess Bielokonski, as she drove away on this eventful evening, took occasi
on to say to Lizabetha Prokofievna:
   "Well-he's a good match-and a bad one; and if you want my opinion, more bad t
han good. You can see for yourself the man is an invalid."
   Lizabetha therefore decided that the prince was impossible as a husband for A
glaya; and during the ensuing night she made a vow that never while she lived sh
ould he marry Aglaya. With this resolve firmly impressed upon her mind, she awok
e next day; but during the morning, after her early lunch, she fell into a condi
tion of remarkable inconsistency.
   In reply to a very guarded question of her sisters', Aglaya had answered cold
ly, but exceedingly haughtily:
   "I have never given him my word at all, nor have I ever counted him as my fut
ure husband-never in my life. He is just as little to me as all the rest."
   Lizabetha Prokofievna suddenly flared up.
   "I did not expect that of you, Aglaya," she said. "He is an impossible husban
d for you,-I know it; and thank God that we agree upon that point; but I did not
 expect to hear such words from you. I thought I should hear a very different to
ne from you.
   I would have turned out everyone who was in the room last night and kept him,
-that's the sort of man he is, in my opinion!"
   Here she suddenly paused, afraid of what she had just said. But she little kn
ew how unfair she was to her daughter at that moment. It was all settled in Agla
ya's mind. She was only waiting for the hour that would bring the matter to a fi
nal climax; and every hint, every careless probing of her wound, did but further
 lacerate her heart.
      VIII.
   THIS same morning dawned for the prince pregnant with no less painful present
iments,-which fact his physical state was, of course, quite enough to account fo
r; but he was so indefinably melancholy,-his sadness could not attach itself to 
anything in particular, and this tormented him more than anything else. Of cours
e certain facts stood before him, clear and painful, but his sadness went beyond
 all that he could remember or imagine; he realized that he was powerless to con
sole himself unaided. Little by little he began to develop the expectation that 
this day something important, something decisive, was to happen to him.
   His attack of yesterday had been a slight one. Excepting some little heavines
s in the head and pain in the limbs, he did not feel any particular effects. His
 brain worked all right, though his soul was heavy within him.
   He rose late, and immediately upon waking remembered all about the previous e
vening; he also remembered, though not quite so clearly, how, half an hour after
 his fit, he had been carried home.
   He soon heard that a messenger from the Epanchins' had already been to inquir
e after him. At half-past eleven another arrived; and this pleased him.
   Vera Lebedeff was one of the first to come to see him and offer her services.
 No sooner did she catch sight of him than she burst into tears; but when he tri
ed to soothe her she began to laugh.
   He was quite struck by the girl's deep sympathy for him; he seized her hand a
nd kissed it. Vera flushed crimson.
   "Oh, don't, don't!" she exclaimed in alarm, snatching her hand away. She went
 hastily out of the room in a state of strange confusion.
   Lebedeff also came to see the prince, in a great hurry to get away to the "de
ceased," as he called General Ivolgin, who was alive still, but very ill. Colia 
also turned up, and begged the prince for pity's sake to tell him all he knew ab
out his father which had been concealed from him till now. He said he had found 
out nearly everything since yesterday; the poor boy was in a state of deep affli
ction. With all the sympathy which he could bring into play, the prince told Col
ia the whole story without reserve, detailing the facts as clearly as he could. 
The tale struck Colia like a thunderbolt. He could not speak. He listened silent
ly, and cried softly to himself the while. The prince perceived that this was an
 impression which would last for the whole of the boy's life. He made haste to e
xplain his view of the matter, and pointed out that the old man's approaching de
ath was probably brought on by horror at the thought of his action; and that it 
was not everyone who was capable of such a feeling.
   Colia's eyes flashed as he listened.
   "Gania and Varia and Ptitsin are a worthless lot! I shall not quarrel with th
em; but from this moment our feet shall not travel the same road. Oh, prince, I 
have felt much that is quite new to me since yesterday! It is a lesson for me. I
 shall now consider my mother as entirely my responsibility; though she may be s
afe enough with Varia. Still, meat and drink is not everything."
   He jumped up and hurried off, remembering suddenly that he was wanted at his 
father's bedside; but before he went out of the room he inquired hastily after t
he prince's health, and receiving the latter's reply, added:
   "Isn't there something else, prince? I heard yesterday, but I have no right t
o talk about this If you ever want a true friend and servant-neither you nor I ar
e so very happy, are we? -come to me. I won't ask you questions, though."
   He ran off and left the prince more dejected than ever.
   Everyone seemed to be speaking prophetically, hinting at some misfortune or s
orrow to come; they had all looked at him as though they knew something which he
 did not know. Lebedeff had asked questions, Colia had hinted, and Vera had shed
 tears. What was it?
   At last, with a sigh of annoyance, he said to himself that it was nothing but
 his own cursed sickly suspicion. His face lighted up with joy when, at about tw
o o'clock, he espied the Epanchins coming along to pay him a short visit, "just 
for a minute." They really had only come for a minute.
   Lizabetha Prokofievna had announced, directly after lunch, that they would al
l take a walk together. The information was given in the form of a command, with
out explanation, drily and abruptly.
   All had issued forth in obedience to the mandate; that is, the girls, mamma, 
and Prince S. Lizabetha Prokofievna went off in a direction exactly contrary to 
the usual one, and all understood very well what she was driving at, but held th
eir peace, fearing to irritate the good lady. She, as though anxious to avoid an
y conversation, walked ahead, silent and alone. At last Adelaida remarked that i
t was no use racing along at such a pace, and that she could not keep up with he
r mother.
   "Look here," said Lizabetha Prokofievna, turning round suddenly;
   "we are passing his house. Whatever Aglaya may think, and in spite of anythin
g that may happen, he is not a stranger to us; besides which, he is ill and in m
isfortune. I, for one, shall call in and see him. Let anyone follow me who cares
 to."
   Of course every one of them followed her.
   The prince hastened to apologize, very properly, for yesterday's mishap with 
the vase, and for the scene generally.
   "Oh, that's nothing," replied Lizabetha; "I'm not sorry for the vase, I'm sor
ry for you. H'm! so you can see that there was a 'scene,' can you? Well, it does
n't matter much, for everyone must realize now that it is impossible to be hard 
on you. Well, au revoir. I advise you to have a walk, and then go to sleep again
 if you can. Come in as usual, if you feel inclined; and be assured, once for al
l, whatever happens, and whatever may have happened, you shall always remain the
 friend of the family-mine, at all events. I can answer for myself."
   In response to this challenge all the others chimed in and reechoed mamma's s
entiments.
   And so they took their departure; but in this hasty and kindly designed visit
 there was hidden a fund of cruelty which Lizabetha Prokofievna never dreamed of
. In the words "as usual," and again in her added, "mine, at all events," there 
seemed an ominous knell of some evil to come.
   The prince began to think of Aglaya. She had certainly given him a wonderful 
smile, both at coming and again at leave-taking, but had not said a word, not ev
en when the others all professed their friendship for him. She had looked very i
ntently at him, but that was all. Her face had been paler than usual; she looked
 as though she had slept badly.
   The prince made up his mind that he would make a point of going there "as usu
al," tonight, and looked feverishly at his watch.
   Vera came in three minutes after the Epanchins had left. "Lef Nicolaievitch,"
 she said, "Aglaya Ivanovna has just given me a message for you."
   The prince trembled.
   "Is it a note?"
   "No, a verbal message; she had hardly time even for that. She begs you earnes
tly not to go out of the house for a single moment all to-day, until seven o'clo
ck in the evening. It may have been nine; I didn't quite hear."
   "But-but, why is this? What does it mean?"
   "I don't know at all; but she said I was to tell you particularly."
   "Did she say that?"
   "Not those very words. She only just had time to whisper as she went by; but 
by the way she looked at me I knew it was important.
   She looked at me in a way that made my heart stop beating."
   The prince asked a few more questions, and though he learned nothing else, he
 became more and more agitated.
   Left alone, he lay down on the sofa, and began to think.
   "Perhaps," he thought, "someone is to be with them until nine tonight and she
 is afraid that I may come and make a fool of myself again, in public." So he sp
ent his time longing for the evening and looking at his watch. But the clearing-
up of the mystery came long before the evening, and came in the form of a new an
d agonizing riddle.
   Half an hour after the Epanchins had gone, Hippolyte arrived, so tired that, 
almost unconscious, he sank into a chair, and broke into such a fit of coughing 
that he could not stop. He coughed till the blood came. His eyes glittered, and 
two red spots on his cheeks grew brighter and brighter. The prince murmured some
thing to him, but Hippolyte only signed that he must be left alone for a while, 
and sat silent. At last he came to himself.
   "I am off," he said, hoarsely, and with difficulty.
   "Shall I see you home?" asked the prince, rising from his seat, but suddenly 
stopping short as he remembered Aglaya's prohibition against leaving the house. 
Hippolyte laughed.
   "I don't mean that I am going to leave your house," he continued, still gaspi
ng and coughing. "On the contrary, I thought it absolutely necessary to come and
 see you; otherwise I should not have troubled you. I am off there, you know, an
d this time I believe, seriously, that I am off! It's all over. I did not come h
ere for sympathy, believe me. I lay down this morning at ten o'clock with the in
tention of not rising again before that time; but I thought it over and rose jus
t once more in order to come here; from which you may deduce that I had some rea
son for wishing to come."
   "It grieves me to see you so, Hippolyte. Why didn't you send me a message? I 
would have come up and saved you this trouble."
   "Well, well! Enough! You've pitied me, and that's all that good manners exact
. I forgot, how are you?"
   "I'm all right; yesterday I was a little-"
   "I know, I heard; the china vase caught it! I'm sorry I wasn't there. I've co
me about something important. In the first place I had, the pleasure of seeing G
avrila Ardalionovitch and Aglaya Ivanovna enjoying a rendezvous on the green ben
ch in the park. I was astonished to see what a fool a man can look. I remarked u
pon the fact to Aglaya Ivanovna when he had gone. I don't think anything ever su
rprises you, prince!" added Hippolyte, gazing incredulously at the prince's calm
 demeanour. "To be astonished by nothing is a sign, they say, of a great intelle
ct. In my opinion it would serve equally well as a sign of great foolishness. I 
am not hinting about you; pardon me! I am very unfortunate today in my expressio
ns.
   "I knew yesterday that Gavrila Ardalionovitch-" began the prince, and paused 
in evident confusion, though Hippolyte had shown annoyance at his betraying no s
urprise.
   "You knew it? Come, that's news! But no-perhaps better not tell me. And were 
you a witness of the meeting?"
   "If you were there yourself you must have known that I was NOT there!"
   "Oh! but you may have been sitting behind the bushes somewhere.
   However, I am very glad, on your account, of course. I was beginning to be af
raid that Mr. Gania-might have the preference!"
   "May I ask you, Hippolyte, not to talk of this subject? And not to use such e
xpressions?"
   "Especially as you know all, eh?"
   "You are wrong. I know scarcely anything, and Aglaya Ivanovna is aware that I
 know nothing. I knew nothing whatever about this meeting. You say there was a m
eeting. Very well; let's leave it so-"
   "Why, what do you mean? You said you knew, and now suddenly you know nothing!
 You say 'very well; let's leave it so.' But I say, don't be so confiding, espec
ially as you know nothing. You are confiding simply BECAUSE you know nothing. Bu
t do you know what these good people have in their minds' eye-Gania and his sist
er?
   Perhaps you are suspicious? Well, well, I'll drop the subject!" he added, has
tily, observing the prince's impatient gesture. "But I've come to you on my own 
business; I wish to make you a clear explanation. What a nuisance it is that one
 cannot die without explanations! I have made such a quantity of them already. D
o you wish to hear what I have to say?"
   "Speak away, I am listening."
   "Very well, but I'll change my mind, and begin about Gania. Just fancy to beg
in with, if you can, that I, too, was given an appointment at the green bench to
day! However, I won't deceive you; I asked for the appointment. I said I had a s
ecret to disclose. I don't know whether I came there too early, I think I must h
ave; but scarcely had I sat down beside Aglaya Ivanovna than I saw Gavrila Ardal
ionovitch and his sister Varia coming along, arm in arm, just as though they wer
e enjoying a morning walk together. Both of them seemed very much astonished, no
t to say disturbed, at seeing me; they evidently had not expected the pleasure. 
Aglaya Ivanovna blushed up, and was actually a little confused. I don't know whe
ther it was merely because I was there, or whether Gania's beauty was too much f
or her! But anyway, she turned crimson, and then finished up the business in a v
ery funny manner. She jumped up from her seat, bowed back to Gania, smiled to Va
ria, and suddenly observed: 'I only came here to express my gratitude for all yo
ur kind wishes on my behalf, and to say that if I find I need your services, bel
ieve me-' Here she bowed them away, as it were, and they both marched off again,
 looking very foolish. Gania evidently could not make head nor tail of the matte
r, and turned as red as a lobster; but Varia understood at once that they must g
et away as quickly as they could, so she dragged Gania away; she is a great deal
 cleverer than he is. As for myself, I went there to arrange a meeting to be hel
d between Aglaya Ivanovna and Nastasia Philipovna."
   "Nastasia Philipovna!" cried the prince.
   "Aha! I think you are growing less cool, my friend, and are beginning to be a
 trifle surprised, aren't you? I'm glad that you are not above ordinary human fe
elings, for once. I'll console you a little now, after your consternation. See w
hat I get for serving a young and high-souled maiden! This morning I received a 
slap in the face from the lady!"
   "A-a moral one?" asked the prince, involuntarily.
   "Yes-not a physical one! I don't suppose anyone-even a woman-would raise a ha
nd against me now. Even Gania would hesitate! I did think at one time yesterday,
 that he would fly at me, though.
   I bet anything that I know what you are thinking of now! You are thinking: 'O
f course one can't strike the little wretch, but one could suffocate him with a 
pillow, or a wet towel, when he is asleep! One OUGHT to get rid of him somehow.'
 I can see in your face that you are thinking that at this very second."
   "I never thought of such a thing for a moment," said the prince, with disgust
.
   "I don't know-I dreamed last night that I was being suffocated with a wet clo
th by-somebody. I'll tell you who it was-Rogojin!
   What do you think, can a man be suffocated with a wet cloth?"
   "I don't know."
   "I've heard so. Well, we'll leave that question just now. Why am I a scandal-
monger? Why did she call me a scandal-monger? And mind, AFTER she had heard ever
y word I had to tell her, and had asked all sorts of questions besides-but such 
is the way of women. For HER sake I entered into relations with Rogojin-an inter
esting man! At HER request I arranged a personal interview between herself and N
astasia Philipovna. Could she have been angry because I hinted that she was enjo
ying Nastasia Philipovna's 'leavings'? Why, I have been impressing it upon her a
ll this while for her own good. Two letters have I written her in that strain, a
nd I began straight off today about its being humiliating for her. Besides, the 
word 'leavings' is not my invention. At all events, they all used it at Gania's,
 and she used it herself. So why am I a scandal-monger? I see-I see you are trem
endously amused, at this moment! Probably you are laughing at me and fitting tho
se silly lines to my case-"'Maybe sad Love upon his setting smiles, And with vai
n hopes his farewell hour beguiles.
   "Ha, ha, ha!"
   Hippolyte suddenly burst into a fit of hysterical laughter, which turned into
 a choking cough.
   "Observe," he gasped, through his coughing, "what a fellow Gania is! He talks
 about Nastasia's 'leavings,' but what does he want to take himself?"
   The prince sat silent for a long while. His mind was filled with dread and ho
rror.
   "You spoke of a meeting with Nastasia Philipovna," he said at last, in a low 
voice.
   "Oh-come! Surely you must know that there is to be a meeting today between Na
stasia and Aglaya Ivanovna, and that Nastasia has been sent for on purpose, thro
ugh Rogojin, from St. Petersburg?
   It has been brought about by invitation of Aglaya Ivanovna and my own efforts
, and Nastasia is at this moment with Rogojin, not far from here-at Dana Alexeye
vna's-that curious friend of hers; and to this questionable house Aglaya Ivanovn
a is to proceed for a friendly chat with Nastasia Philipovna, and for the settle
ment of several problems. They are going to play at arithmetic-didn't you know a
bout it? Word of honour?"
   "It's a most improbable story."
   "Oh, very well! if it's improbable-it is-that's all! And yet-where should you
 have heard it? Though I must say, if a fly crosses the room it's known all over
 the place here. However, I've warned you, and you may be grateful to me. Well-a
u revoir-probably in the next world! One more thing-don't think that I am tellin
g you all this for your sake. Oh, dear, no! Do you know that I dedicated my conf
ession to Aglaya Ivanovna? I did though, and how she took it, ha, ha! Oh, no! I 
am not acting from any high, exalted motives. But though I may have behaved like
 a cad to you, I have not done HER any harm. I don't apologize for my words abou
t 'leavings' and all that. I am atoning for that, you see, by telling you the pl
ace and time of the meeting. Goodbye!
   You had better take your measures, if you are worthy the name of a man! The m
eeting is fixed for this evening-that's certain."
   Hippolyte walked towards the door, but the prince called him back and he stop
ped.
   "Then you think Aglaya Ivanovna herself intends to go to Nastasia Philipovna'
s tonight?" he asked, and bright hectic spots came out on his cheeks and forehea
d.
   "I don't know absolutely for certain; but in all probability it is so," repli
ed Hippolyte, looking round. "Nastasia would hardly go to her; and they can't me
et at Gania's, with a man nearly dead in the house."
   "It's impossible, for that very reason," said the prince. "How would she get 
out if she wished to? You don't know the habits of that house-she COULD not get 
away alone to Nastasia Philipovna's! It's all nonsense!"
   "Look here, my dear prince, no one jumps out of the window if they can help i
t; but when there's a fire, the dandiest gentleman or the finest lady in the wor
ld will skip out! When the moment comes, and there's nothing else to be done-our
 young lady will go to Nastasia Philipovna's! Don't they let the young ladies ou
t of the house alone, then?"
   "I didn't mean that exactly."
   "If you didn't mean that, then she has only to go down the steps and walk off
, and she need never come back unless she chooses:
   Ships are burned behind one sometimes, and one doesn't care to return whence 
one came. Life need not consist only of lunches, and dinners, and Prince S's. It
 strikes me you take Aglaya Ivanovna for some conventional boarding-school girl.
 I said so to her, and she quite agreed with me. Wait till seven or eight o'cloc
k. In your place I would send someone there to keep watch, so as to seize the ex
act moment when she steps out of the house.
   Send Colia. He'll play the spy with pleasure-for you at least.
   Ha, ha, ha!"
   Hippolyte went out.
   There was no reason for the prince to set anyone to watch, even if he had bee
n capable of such a thing. Aglaya's command that he should stay at home all day 
seemed almost explained now. Perhaps she meant to call for him, herself, or it m
ight be, of course, that she was anxious to make sure of his not coming there, a
nd therefore bade him remain at home. His head whirled; the whole room seemed to
 be turning round. He lay down on the sofa, and closed his eyes.
   One way or the other the question was to be decided at last-finally.
   Oh, no, he did not think of Aglaya as a boarding-school miss, or a young lady
 of the conventional type! He had long since feared that she might take some suc
h step as this. But why did she wish to see Nastasia?
   He shivered all over as he lay; he was in high fever again.
   No! he did not account her a child. Certain of her looks, certain of her word
s, of late, had filled him with apprehension. At times it had struck him that sh
e was putting too great a restraint upon herself, and he remembered that he had 
been alarmed to observe this. He had tried, all these days, to drive away the he
avy thoughts that oppressed him; but what was the hidden mystery of that soul? T
he question had long tormented him, although he implicitly trusted that soul. An
d now it was all to be cleared up. It was a dreadful thought. And "that woman" a
gain! Why did he always feel as though "that woman" were fated to appear at each
 critical moment of his life, and tear the thread of his destiny like a bit of r
otten string? That he always HAD felt this he was ready to swear, although he wa
s half delirious at the moment. If he had tried to forget her, all this time, it
 was simply because he was afraid of her. Did he love the woman or hate her? Thi
s question he did not once ask himself today; his heart was quite pure. He knew 
whom he loved. He was not so much afraid of this meeting, nor of its strangeness
, nor of any reasons there might be for it, unknown to himself; he was afraid of
 the woman herself, Nastasia Philipovna. He remembered, some days afterwards, ho
w during all those fevered hours he had seen but HER eyes, HER look, had heard H
ER voice, strange words of hers; he remembered that this was so, although he cou
ld not recollect the details of his thoughts.
   He could remember that Vera brought him some dinner, and that he took it; but
 whether he slept after dinner, or no, he could not recollect.
   He only knew that he began to distinguish things clearly from the moment when
 Aglaya suddenly appeared, and he jumped up from the sofa and went to meet her. 
It was just a quarter past seven then.
   Aglaya was quite alone, and dressed, apparently hastily, in a light mantle. H
er face was pale, as it had been in the morning, and her eyes were ablaze with b
right but subdued fire. He had never seen that expression in her eyes before.
   She gazed attentively at him.
   "You are quite ready, I observe," she said, with absolute composure, "dressed
, and your hat in your hand. I see somebody has thought fit to warn you, and I k
now who. Hippolyte?"
   "Yes, he told me," said the prince, feeling only half alive.
   "Come then. You know, I suppose, that you must escort me there?
   You are well enough to go out, aren't you?"
   "I am well enough; but is it really possible?-"
   He broke off abruptly, and could not add another word. This was his one attem
pt to stop the mad child, and, after he had made it, he followed her as though h
e had no will of his own. Confused as his thoughts were, he was, nevertheless, c
apable of realizing the fact that if he did not go with her, she would go alone,
 and so he must go with her at all hazards. He guessed the strength of her deter
mination; it was beyond him to check it.
   They walked silently, and said scarcely a word all the way. He only noticed t
hat she seemed to know the road very well; and once, when he thought it better t
o go by a certain lane, and remarked to her that it would be quieter and less pu
blic, she only said, "it's all the same," and went on.
   When they were almost arrived at Daria Alexeyevna's house (it was a large woo
den structure of ancient date), a gorgeously-dressed lady and a young girl came 
out of it. Both these ladies took their seats in a carriage, which was waiting a
t the door, talking and laughing loudly the while, and drove away without appear
ing to notice the approaching couple.
   No sooner had the carriage driven off than the door opened once more; and Rog
ojin, who had apparently been awaiting them, let them in and closed it after the
m.
   "There is not another soul in the house now excepting our four selves," he sa
id aloud, looking at the prince in a strange way.
   Nastasia Philipovna was waiting for them in the first room they went into. Sh
e was dressed very simply, in black.
   She rose at their entrance, but did not smile or give her hand, even to the p
rince. Her anxious eyes were fixed upon Aglaya. Both sat down, at a little dista
nce from one another-Aglaya on the sofa, in the corner of the room, Nastasia by 
the window. The prince and Rogojin remained standing, and were not invited to si
t.
   Muishkin glanced at Rogojin in perplexity, but the latter only smiled disagre
eably, and said nothing. The silence continued for some few moments.
   An ominous expression passed over Nastasia Philipovna's face, of a sudden. It
 became obstinate-looking, hard, and full of hatred; but she did not take her ey
es off her visitors for a moment.
   Aglaya was clearly confused, but not frightened. On entering she had merely g
lanced momentarily at her rival, and then had sat still, with her eyes on the gr
ound, apparently in thought. Once or twice she glanced casually round the room. 
A shade of disgust was visible in her expression; she looked as though she were 
afraid of contamination in this place.
   She mechanically arranged her dress, and fidgeted uncomfortably, eventually c
hanging her seat to the other end of the sofa.
   Probably she was unconscious of her own movements; but this very unconsciousn
ess added to the offensiveness of their suggested meaning.
   At length she looked straight into Nastasia's eyes, and instantly read all th
ere was to read in her rival's expression. Woman understood woman! Aglaya shudde
red.
   "You know of course why I requested this meeting?" she said at last, quietly,
 and pausing twice in the delivery of this very short sentence.
   "No-I know nothing about it," said Nastasia, drily and abruptly.
   Aglaya blushed. Perhaps it struck her as very strange and impossible that she
 should really be sitting here and waiting for "that woman's" reply to her quest
ion.
   At the first sound of Nastasia's voice a shudder ran through her frame. Of co
urse "that woman" observed and took in all this.
   "You know quite well, but you are pretending to be ignorant," said Aglaya, ve
ry low, with her eyes on the ground.
   "Why should I?" asked Nastasia Philipovna, smiling slightly.
   "You want to take advantage of my position, now that I am in your house," con
tinued Aglaya, awkwardly.
   "For that position YOU are to blame and not I," said Nastasia, flaring up sud
denly. "I did not invite YOU, but you me; and to this moment I am quite ignorant
 as to why I am thus honoured."
   Aglaya raised her head haughtily.
   "Restrain your tongue!" she said. "I did not come here to fight you with your
 own weapons.
   "Oh! then you did come 'to fight,' I may conclude? Dear me!-and I thought you
 were cleverer-"
   They looked at one another with undisguised malice. One of these women had wr
itten to the other, so lately, such letters as we have seen; and it all was disp
ersed at their first meeting. Yet it appeared that not one of the four persons i
n the room considered this in any degree strange.
   The prince who, up to yesterday, would not have believed that he could even d
ream of such an impossible scene as this, stood and listened and looked on, and 
felt as though he had long foreseen it all. The most fantastic dream seemed sudd
enly to have been metamorphosed into the most vivid reality.
   One of these women so despised the other, and so longed to express her contem
pt for her (perhaps she had only come for that very purpose, as Rogojin said nex
t day), that howsoever fantastical was the other woman, howsoever afflicted her 
spirit and disturbed her understanding, no preconceived idea of hers could possi
bly stand up against that deadly feminine contempt of her rival. The prince felt
 sure that Nastasia would say nothing about the letters herself; but he could ju
dge by her flashing eyes and the expression of her face what the thought of thos
e letters must be costing her at this moment. He would have given half his life 
to prevent Aglaya from speaking of them. But Aglaya suddenly braced herself up, 
and seemed to master herself fully, all in an instant.
   "You have not quite understood," she said. "I did not come to quarrel with yo
u, though I do not like you. I came to speak to you as as one human being to anot
her. I came with my mind made up as to what I had to say to you, and I shall not
 change my intention, although you may misunderstand me. So much the worse for y
ou, not for myself! I wished to reply to all you have written to me and to reply
 personally, because I think that is the more convenient way. Listen to my reply
 to all your letters.
   I began to be sorry for Prince Lef Nicolaievitch on the very day I made his a
cquaintance, and when I heard-afterwards-of all that took place at your house in
 the evening, I was sorry for him because he was such a simple-minded man, and b
ecause he, in the simplicity of his soul, believed that he could be happy with a
 woman of your character. What I feared actually took place; you could not love 
him, you tortured him, and threw him over. You could not love him because you ar
e too proud-no, not proud, that is an error; because you are too vain-no, not qu
ite that either; too self-loving; you are self-loving to madness. Your letters t
o me are a proof of it. You could not love so simple a soul as his, and perhaps 
in your heart you despised him and laughed at him.
   All you could love was your shame and the perpetual thought that you were dis
graced and insulted. If you were less shameful, or had no cause at all for shame
, you would be still more unhappy than you are now.
   Aglaya brought out these thronging words with great satisfaction.
   They came from her lips hurriedly and impetuously, and had been prepared and 
thought out long ago, even before she had ever dreamed of the present meeting. S
he watched with eagerness the effect of her speech as shown in Nastasia's face, 
which was distorted with agitation.
   "You remember," she continued, "he wrote me a letter at that time; he says yo
u know all about that letter and that you even read it. I understand all by mean
s of this letter, and understand it correctly. He has since confirmed it all to 
me-what I now say to you, word for word. After receiving his letter I waited; I 
guessed that you would soon come back here, because you could never do without P
etersburg; you are still too young and lovely for the provinces. However, this i
s not my own idea," she added, blushing dreadfully; and from this moment the col
our never left her cheeks to the end of her speech. When I next saw the prince I
 began to feel terribly pained and hurt on his account. Do not laugh; if you lau
gh you are unworthy of understanding what I say."
   "Surely you see that I am not laughing," said Nastasia, sadly and sternly.
   "However, it's all the same to me; laugh or not, just as you please. When I a
sked him about you, he told me that he had long since ceased to love you, that t
he very recollection of you was a torture to him, but that he was sorry for you;
 and that when he thought of you his heart was pierced. I ought to tell you that
 I never in my life met a man anything like him for noble simplicity of mind and
 for boundless trustfulness. I guessed that anyone who liked could deceive him, 
and that he would immediately forgive anyone who did deceive him; and it was for
 this that I grew to love him-"
   Aglaya paused for a moment, as though suddenly brought up in astonishment tha
t she could have said these words, but at the same time a great pride shone in h
er eyes, like a defiant assertion that it would not matter to her if "this woman
" laughed in her face for the admission just made.
   "I have told you all now, and of course you understand what I wish of you."
   "Perhaps I do; but tell me yourself," said Nastasia Philipovna, quietly.
   Aglaya flushed up angrily.
   "I wished to find out from you," she said, firmly, "by what right you dare to
 meddle with his feelings for me? By what right you dared send me those letters?
 By what right do you continually remind both me and him that you love him, afte
r you yourself threw him over and ran away from him in so insulting and shameful
 a way?"
   "I never told either him or you that I loved him!" replied Nastasia Philipovn
a, with an effort. "And-and I did run away from him-you are right there," she ad
ded, scarcely audibly.
   "Never told either him or me?" cried Aglaya. "How about your letters? Who ask
ed you to try to persuade me to marry him? Was not that a declaration from you? 
Why do you force yourself upon us in this way? I confess I thought at first that
 you were anxious to arouse an aversion for him in my heart by your meddling, in
 order that I might give him up; and it was only afterwards that I guessed the t
ruth. You imagined that you were doing an heroic action! How could you spare any
 love for him, when you love your own vanity to such an extent? Why could you no
t simply go away from here, instead of writing me those absurd letters? Why do y
ou not NOW marry that generous man who loves you, and has done you the honour of
 offering you his hand? It is plain enough why; if you marry Rogojin you lose yo
ur grievance; you will have nothing more to complain of. You will be receiving t
oo much honour. Evgenie Pavlovitch was saying the other day that you had read to
o many poems and are too well educated for-your position; and that you live in i
dleness. Add to this your vanity, and, there you have reason enough-"
   "And do you not live in idleness?"
   Things had come to this unexpected point too quickly. Unexpected because Nast
asia Philipovna, on her way to Pavlofsk, had thought and considered a good deal,
 and had expected something different, though perhaps not altogether good, from 
this interview; but Aglaya had been carried away by her own outburst, just as a 
rolling stone gathers impetus as it careers downhill, and could not restrain her
self in the satisfaction of revenge.
   It was strange, Nastasia Philipovna felt, to see Aglaya like this. She gazed 
at her, and could hardly believe her eyes and ears for a moment or two.
   Whether she were a woman who had read too many poems, as Evgenie Pavlovitch s
upposed, or whether she were mad, as the prince had assured Aglaya, at all event
s, this was a woman who, in spite of her occasionally cynical and audacious mann
er, was far more refined and trustful and sensitive than appeared. There was a c
ertain amount of romantic dreaminess and caprice in her, but with the fantastic 
was mingled much that was strong and deep.
   The prince realized this, and great suffering expressed itself in his face.
   Aglaya observed it, and trembled with anger.
   "How dare you speak so to me?" she said, with a haughtiness which was quite i
ndescribable, replying to Nastasia's last remark.
   "You must have misunderstood what I said," said Nastasia, in some surprise.
   "If you wished to preserve your good name, why did you not give up your-your 
'guardian,' Totski, without all that theatrical posturing?" said Aglaya, suddenl
y a propos of nothing.
   "What do you know of my position, that you dare to judge me?" cried Nastasia,
 quivering with rage, and growing terribly white.
   "I know this much, that you did not go out to honest work, but went away with
 a rich man, Rogojin, in order to pose as a fallen angel. I don't wonder that To
tski was nearly driven to suicide by such a fallen angel."
   "Silence!" cried Nastasia Philipovna. "You are about as fit to understand me 
as the housemaid here, who bore witness against her lover in court the other day
. She would understand me better than you do."
   "Probably an honest girl living by her own toil. Why do you speak of a housem
aid so contemptuously?"
   "I do not despise toil; I despise you when you speak of toil."
   "If you had cared to be an honest woman, you would have gone out as a laundre
ss."
   Both had risen, and were gazing at one another with pallid faces.
   "Aglaya, don't! This is unfair," cried the prince, deeply distressed.
   Rogojin was not smiling now; he sat and listened with folded arms, and lips t
ight compressed.
   "There, look at her," cried Nastasia, trembling with passion.
   "Look at this young lady! And I imagined her an angel! Did you come to me wit
hout your governess, Aglaya Ivanovna? Oh, fie, now shall I just tell you why you
 came here today? Shall I tell you without any embellishments? You came because 
you were afraid of me!"
   "Afraid of YOU?" asked Aglaya, beside herself with naive amazement that the o
ther should dare talk to her like this.
   "Yes, me, of course! Of course you were afraid of me, or you would not have d
ecided to come. You cannot despise one you fear.
   And to think that I have actually esteemed you up to this very moment! Do you
 know why you are afraid of me, and what is your object now? You wished to satis
fy yourself with your own eyes as to which he loves best, myself or you, because
 you are fearfully jealous."
   "He has told me already that he hates you," murmured Aglaya, scarcely audibly
.
   "Perhaps, perhaps! I am not worthy of him, I know. But I think you are lying,
 all the same. He cannot hate me, and he cannot have said so. I am ready to forg
ive you, in consideration of your position; but I confess I thought better of yo
u. I thought you were wiser, and more beautiful, too; I did, indeed! Well, take 
your treasure! See, he is gazing at you, he can't recollect himself. Take him, b
ut on one condition; go away at once, this instant!"
   She fell back into a chair, and burst into tears. But suddenly some new expre
ssion blazed in her eyes. She stared fixedly at Aglaya, and rose from her seat.
   "Or would you like me to bid him, BID HIM, do you hear, COMMAND HIM, now, at 
once, to throw you up, and remain mine for ever?
   Shall I? He will stay, and he will marry me too, and you shall trot home all 
alone. Shall I?-shall I say the word?" she screamed like a madwoman, scarcely be
lieving herself that she could really pronounce such wild words.
   Aglaya had made for the door in terror, but she stopped at the threshold, and
 listened. "Shall I turn Rogojin off? Ha! ha! you thought I would marry him for 
your benefit, did you? Why, I'll call out NOW, if you like, in your presence, 'R
ogojin, get out!' and say to the prince, 'Do you remember what you promised me?'
   Heavens! what a fool I have been to humiliate myself before them!
   Why, prince, you yourself gave me your word that you would marry me whatever 
happened, and would never abandon me. You said you loved me and would forgive me
 all, and-and resp-yes, you even said that! I only ran away from you in order to
 set you free, and now I don't care to let you go again. Why does she treat me s
o-so shamefully? I am not a loose woman-ask Rogojin there! He'll tell you. Will 
you go again now that she has insulted me, before your eyes, too; turn away from
 me and lead her away, arm-in-arm?
   May you be accursed too, for you were the only one I trusted among them all! 
Go away, Rogojin, I don't want you," she continued, blind with fury, and forcing
 the words out with dry lips and distorted features, evidently not believing a s
ingle word of her own tirade, but, at the same time, doing her utmost to prolong
 the moment of self-deception.
   The outburst was so terribly violent that the prince thought it would have ki
lled her.
   "There he is!" she shrieked again, pointing to the prince and addressing Agla
ya. "There he is! and if he does not approach me at once and take ME and throw y
ou over, then have him for your own-I give him up to you! I don't want him!"
   Both she and Aglaya stood and waited as though in expectation, and both looke
d at the prince like madwomen.
   But he, perhaps, did not understand the full force of this challenge; in fact
, it is certain he did not. All he could see was the poor despairing face which,
 as he had said to Aglaya,
   "had pierced his heart for ever."
   He could bear it no longer, and with a look of entreaty, mingled with reproac
h, he addressed Aglaya, pointing to Nastasia the while:
   "How can you?" he murmured; "she is so unhappy."
   But he had no time to say another word before. Aglaya's terrible look bereft 
him of speech. In that look was embodied so dreadful a suffering and so deadly a
 hatred, that he gave a cry and flew to her; but it was too late.
   She could not hold out long enough even to witness his movement in her direct
ion. She had hidden her face in her hands, cried once " Oh, my God!" and rushed 
out of the room. Rogojin followed her to undo the bolts of the door and let her 
out into the street.
   The prince made a rush after her, but he, was caught and held back. The disto
rted, livid face of Nastasia gazed at him reproachfully, and her blue lips whisp
ered:
   "What? Would you go to her-to her?"
   She fell senseless into his arms.
   He raised her, carried her into the room, placed her in an armchair, and stoo
d over her, stupefied. On the table stood a tumbler of water. Rogojin, who now r
eturned, took this and sprinkled a little in her face. She opened her eyes, but 
for a moment she understood nothing.
   Suddenly she looked around, shuddered, gave a loud cry, and threw herself in 
the prince's arms.
   "Mine, mine!" she cried. "Has the proud young lady gone? Ha, ha, ha!" she lau
ghed hysterically. "And I had given him up to her!
   Why-why did I? Mad-mad! Get away, Rogojin! Ha, ha, ha!"
   Rogojin stared intently at them; then he took his hat, and without a word, le
ft the room.
   A few moments later, the prince was seated by Nastasia on the sofa, gazing in
to her eyes and stroking her face and hair, as he would a little child's. He lau
ghed when she laughed, and was ready to cry when she cried. He did not speak, bu
t listened to her excited, disconnected chatter, hardly understanding a word of 
it the while. No sooner did he detect the slightest appearance of complaining, o
r weeping, or reproaching, than he would smile at her kindly, and begin stroking
 her hair and her cheeks, soothing and consoling her once more, as if she were a
 child.
      IX.
   A FORTNIGHT had passed since the events recorded in the last chapter, and the
 position of the actors in our story had become so changed that it is almost imp
ossible for us to continue the tale without some few explanations. Yet we feel t
hat we ought to limit ourselves to the simple record of facts, without much atte
mpt at explanation, for a very patent reason: because we ourselves have the grea
test possible difficulty in accounting for the facts to be recorded. Such a stat
ement on our part may appear strange to the reader. How is anyone to tell a stor
y which he cannot understand himself? In order to keep clear of a false position
, we had perhaps better give an example of what we mean; and probably the intell
igent reader will soon understand the difficulty. More especially are we incline
d to take this course since the example will constitute a distinct march forward
 of our story, and will not hinder the progress of the events remaining to be re
corded.
   During the next fortnight-that is, through the early part of July-the history
 of our hero was circulated in the form of strange, diverting, most unlikely-sou
nding stories, which passed from mouth to mouth, through the streets and villas 
adjoining those inhabited by Lebedeff, Ptitsin, Nastasia Philipovna and the Epan
chins; in fact, pretty well through the whole town and its environs. All society
-both the inhabitants of the place and those who came down of an evening for the
 music-had got hold of one and the same story, in a thousand varieties of detail
-as to how a certain young prince had raised a terrible scandal in a most respec
table household, had thrown over a daughter of the family, to whom he was engage
d, and had been captured by a woman of shady reputation whom he was determined t
o marry at once-breaking off all old ties for the satisfaction of his insane ide
a; and, in spite of the public indignation roused by his action, the marriage wa
s to take place in Pavlofsk openly and publicly, and the prince had announced hi
s intention of going through with it with head erect and looking the whole world
 in the face. The story was so artfully adorned with scandalous details, and per
sons of so great eminence and importance were apparently mixed up in it, while, 
at the same time, the evidence was so circumstantial, that it was no wonder the 
matter gave food for plenty of curiosity and gossip.
   According to the reports of the most talented gossip-mongers-those who, in ev
ery class of society, are always in haste to explain every event to their neighb
ours-the young gentleman concerned was of good family-a prince-fairly rich-weak 
of intellect, but a democrat and a dabbler in the Nihilism of the period, as exp
osed by Mr. Turgenieff. He could hardly talk Russian, but had fallen in love wit
h one of the Miss Epanchins, and his suit met with so much encouragement that he
 had been received in the house as the recognized bridegroom-to-be of the young 
lady. But like the Frenchman of whom the story is told that he studied for holy 
orders, took all the oaths, was ordained priest, and next morning wrote to his b
ishop informing him that, as he did not believe in God and considered it wrong t
o deceive the people and live upon their pockets, he begged to surrender the ord
ers conferred upon him the day before, and to inform his lordship that he was se
nding this letter to the public press,-like this Frenchman, the prince played a 
false game. It was rumoured that he had purposely waited for the solemn occasion
 of a large evening party at the house of his future bride, at which he was intr
oduced to several eminent persons, in order publicly to make known his ideas and
 opinions, and thereby insult the "big-wigs," and to throw over his bride as off
ensively as possible; and that, resisting the servants who were told off to turn
 him out of the house, he had seized and thrown down a magnificent china vase. A
s a characteristic addition to the above, it was currently reported that the you
ng prince really loved the lady to whom he was engaged, and had thrown her over 
out of purely Nihilistic motives, with the intention of giving himself the satis
faction of marrying a fallen woman in the face of all the world, thereby publish
ing his opinion that there is no distinction between virtuous and disreputable w
omen, but that all women are alike, free; and a "fallen" woman, indeed, somewhat
 superior to a virtuous one.
   It was declared that he believed in no classes or anything else, excepting "t
he woman question."
   All this looked likely enough, and was accepted as fact by most of the inhabi
tants of the place, especially as it was borne out, more or less, by daily occur
rences.
   Of course much was said that could not be determined absolutely.
   For instance, it was reported that the poor girl had so loved her future husb
and that she had followed him to the house of the other woman, the day after she
 had been thrown over; others said that he had insisted on her coming, himself, 
in order to shame and insult her by his taunts and Nihilistic confessions when s
he reached the house. However all these things might be, the public interest in 
the matter grew daily, especially as it became clear that the scandalous wedding
 was undoubtedly to take place.
   So that if our readers were to ask an explanation, not of the wild reports ab
out the prince's Nihilistic opinions, but simply as to how such a marriage could
 possibly satisfy his real aspirations, or as to the spiritual condition of our 
hero at this time, we confess that we should have great difficulty in giving the
 required information.
   All we know is, that the marriage really was arranged, and that the prince ha
d commissioned Lebedeff and Keller to look after all the necessary business conn
ected with it; that he had requested them to spare no expense; that Nastasia her
self was hurrying on the wedding; that Keller was to be the prince's best man, a
t his own earnest request; and that Burdovsky was to give Nastasia away, to his 
great delight. The wedding was to take place before the middle of July.
   But, besides the above, we are cognizant of certain other undoubted facts, wh
ich puzzle us a good deal because they seem flatly to contradict the foregoing.
   We suspect, for instance, that having commissioned Lebedeff and the others, a
s above, the prince immediately forgot all about masters of ceremonies and even 
the ceremony itself; and we feel quite certain that in making these arrangements
 he did so in order that he might absolutely escape all thought of the wedding, 
and even forget its approach if he could, by detailing all business concerning i
t to others.
   What did he think of all this time, then? What did he wish for?
   There is no doubt that he was a perfectly free agent all through, and that as
 far as Nastasia was concerned, there was no force of any kind brought to bear o
n him. Nastasia wished for a speedy marriage, true!-but the prince agreed at onc
e to her proposals; he agreed, in fact, so casually that anyone might suppose he
 was but acceding to the most simple and ordinary suggestion.
   There are many strange circumstances such as this before us; but in our opini
on they do but deepen the mystery, and do not in the smallest degree help us to 
understand the case.
   However, let us take one more example. Thus, we know for a fact that during t
he whole of this fortnight the prince spent all his days and evenings with Nasta
sia; he walked with her, drove with her; he began to be restless whenever he pas
sed an hour without seeing her-in fact, to all appearances, he sincerely loved h
er.
   He would listen to her for hours at a time with a quiet smile on his face, sc
arcely saying a word himself. And yet we know, equally certainly, that during th
is period he several times set off, suddenly, to the Epanchins', not concealing 
the fact from Nastasia Philipovna, and driving the latter to absolute despair.
   We know also that he was not received at the Epanchins' so long as they remai
ned at Pavlofsk, and that he was not allowed an interview with Aglaya;-but next 
day he would set off once more on the same errand, apparently quite oblivious of
 the fact of yesterday's visit having been a failure,-and, of course, meeting wi
th another refusal. We know, too, that exactly an hour after Aglaya had fled fro
m Nastasia Philipovna's house on that fateful evening, the prince was at the Epa
nchins',-and that his appearance there had been the cause of the greatest conste
rnation and dismay; for Aglaya had not been home, and the family only discovered
 then, for the first time, that the two of them had been to Nastasia's house tog
ether.
   It was said that Elizabetha Prokofievna and her daughters had there and then 
denounced the prince in the strongest terms, and had refused any further acquain
tance and friendship with him; their rage and denunciations being redoubled when
 Varia Ardalionovna suddenly arrived and stated that Aglaya had been at her hous
e in a terrible state of mind for the last hour, and that she refused to come ho
me.
   This last item of news, which disturbed Lizabetha Prokofievna more than anyth
ing else, was perfectly true. On leaving Nastasia's, Aglaya had felt that she wo
uld rather die than face her people, and had therefore gone straight to Nina Ale
xandrovna's. On receiving the news, Lizabetha and her daughters and the general 
all rushed off to Aglaya, followed by Prince Lef Nicolaievitch-undeterred by his
 recent dismissal; but through Varia he was refused a sight of Aglaya here also.
 The end of the episode was that when Aglaya saw her mother and sisters crying o
ver her and not uttering a word of reproach, she had flung herself into their ar
ms and gone straight home with them.
   It was said that Gania managed to make a fool of himself even on this occasio
n; for, finding himself alone with Aglaya for a minute or two when Varia had gon
e to the Epanchins', he had thought it a fitting opportunity to make a declarati
on of his love, and on hearing this Aglaya, in spite of her state of mind at the
 time, had suddenly burst out laughing, and had put a strange question to him. S
he asked him whether he would consent to hold his finger to a lighted candle in 
proof of his devotion!
   Gania-it was said-looked so comically bewildered that Aglaya had almost laugh
ed herself into hysterics, and had rushed out of the room and upstairs,-where he
r parents had found her.
   Hippolyte told the prince this last story, sending for him on purpose. When M
uishkin heard about the candle and Gania's finger he had laughed so that he had 
quite astonished Hippolyte,-and then shuddered and burst into tears. The prince'
s condition during those days was strange and perturbed. Hippolyte plainly decla
red that he thought he was out of his mind;-this, however, was hardly to be reli
ed upon.
   Offering all these facts to our readers and refusing to explain them, we do n
ot for a moment desire to justify our hero's conduct. On the contrary, we are qu
ite prepared to feel our share of the indignation which his behaviour aroused in
 the hearts of his friends. Even Vera Lebedeff was angry with him for a while; s
o was Colia; so was Keller, until he was selected for best man; so was Lebedeff 
himself,-who began to intrigue against him out of pure irritation;-but of this a
non. In fact we are in full accord with certain forcible words spoken to the pri
nce by Evgenie Pavlovitch, quite unceremoniously, during the course of a friendl
y conversation, six or seven days after the events at Nastasia Philipovna's hous
e.
   We may remark here that not only the Epanchins themselves, but all who had an
ything to do with them, thought it right to break with the prince in consequence
 of his conduct. Prince S. even went so far as to turn away and cut him dead in 
the street. But Evgenie Pavlovitch was not afraid to compromise himself by payin
g the prince a visit, and did so, in spite of the fact that he had recommenced t
o visit at the Epanchins', where he was received with redoubled hospitality and 
kindness after the temporary estrangement.
   Evgenie called upon the prince the day after that on which the Epanchins left
 Pavlofsk. He knew of all the current rumours,-in fact, he had probably contribu
ted to them himself. The prince was delighted to see him, and immediately began 
to speak of the Epanchins;-which simple and straightforward opening quite took E
vgenie's fancy, so that he melted at once, and plunged in medias res without cer
emony.
   The prince did not know, up to this, that the Epanchins had left the place. H
e grew very pale on hearing the news; but a moment later he nodded his head, and
 said thoughtfully:
   "I knew it was bound to be so." Then he added quickly:
   "Where have they gone to?"
   Evgenie meanwhile observed him attentively, and the rapidity of the questions
, their, simplicity, the prince's candour, and at the same time, his evident per
plexity and mental agitation, surprised him considerably. However, he told Muish
kin all he could, kindly and in detail. The prince hardly knew anything, for thi
s was the first informant from the household whom he had met since the estrangem
ent.
   Evgenie reported that Aglaya had been really ill, and that for two nights she
 had not slept at all, owing to high fever; that now she was better and out of s
erious danger, but still in a nervous, hysterical state.
   "It's a good thing that there is peace in the house, at all events," he conti
nued. "They never utter a hint about the past, not only in Aglaya's presence, bu
t even among themselves. The old people are talking of a trip abroad in the autu
mn, immediately after Adelaida's wedding; Aglaya received the news in silence."
   Evgenie himself was very likely going abroad also; so were Prince S. and his 
wife, if affairs allowed of it; the general was to stay at home. They were all a
t their estate of Colmina now, about twenty miles or so from St. Petersburg. Pri
ncess Bielokonski had not returned to Moscow yet, and was apparently staying on 
for reasons of her own. Lizabetha Prokofievna had insisted that it was quite imp
ossible to remain in Pavlofsk after what had happened. Evgenie had told her of a
ll the rumours current in town about the affair; so that there could be no talk 
of their going to their house on the Yelagin as yet.
   "And in point of fact, prince," added Evgenie Pavlovitch, "you must allow tha
t they could hardly have stayed here, considering that they knew of all that wen
t on at your place, and in the face of your daily visits to their house, visits 
which you insisted upon making in spite of their refusal to see you."
   "Yes-yes, quite so; you are quite right. I wished to see Aglaya Ivanovna, you
 know!" said the prince, nodding his head.
   "Oh, my dear fellow," cried Evgenie, warmly, with real sorrow in his voice, "
how could you permit all that to come about as it has? Of course, of course, I k
now it was all so unexpected. I admit that you, only naturally, lost your head, 
and-and could not stop the foolish girl; that was not in your power. I quite see
 so much; but you really should have understood how seriously she cared for you.
 She could not bear to share you with another; and you could bring yourself to t
hrow away and shatter such a treasure! Oh, prince, prince!"
   "Yes, yes, you are quite right again," said the poor prince, in anguish of mi
nd. "I was wrong, I know. But it was only Aglaya who looked on Nastasia Philipov
na so; no one else did, you know."
   "But that's just the worst of it all, don't you see, that there was absolutel
y nothing serious about the matter in reality!" cried Evgenie, beside himself: "
Excuse me, prince, but I have thought over all this; I have thought a great deal
 over it; I know all that had happened before; I know all that took place six mo
nths since; and I know there was NOTHING serious about the matter, it was but fa
ncy, smoke, fantasy, distorted by agitation, and only the alarmed jealousy of an
 absolutely inexperienced girl could possibly have mistaken it for serious reali
ty."
   Here Evgenie Pavlovitch quite let himself go, and gave the reins to his indig
nation.
   Clearly and reasonably, and with great psychological insight, he drew a pictu
re of the prince's past relations with Nastasia Philipovna. Evgenie Pavlovitch a
lways had a ready tongue, but on this occasion his eloquence, surprised himself.
 "From the very beginning," he said, "you began with a lie; what began with a li
e was bound to end with a lie; such is the law of nature. I do not agree, in fac
t I am angry, when I hear you called an idiot; you are far too intelligent to de
serve such an epithet; but you are so far STRANGE as to be unlike others; that y
ou must allow, yourself. Now, I have come to the conclusion that the basis of al
l that has happened, has been first of all your innate inexperience (remark the 
expression 'innate,' prince). Then follows your unheard-of simplicity of heart; 
then comes your absolute want of sense of proportion (to this want you have seve
ral times confessed); and lastly, a mass, an accumulation, of intellectual convi
ctions which you, in your unexampled honesty of soul, accept unquestionably as a
lso innate and natural and true.
   Admit, prince, that in your relations with Nastasia Philipovna there has exis
ted, from the very first, something democratic, and the fascination, so to speak
, of the 'woman question'? I know all about that scandalous scene at Nastasia Ph
ilipovna's house when Rogojin brought the money, six months ago. I'll show you y
ourself as in a looking-glass, if you like. I know exactly all that went on, in 
every detail, and why things have turned out as they have.
   You thirsted, while in Switzerland, for your home-country, for Russia; you re
ad, doubtless, many books about Russia, excellent books, I dare say, but hurtful
 to YOU; and you arrived here; as it were, on fire with the longing to be of ser
vice. Then, on the very day of your arrival, they tell you a sad story of an ill
used woman; they tell YOU, a knight, pure and without reproach, this tale of a p
oor woman! The same day you actually SEE her; you are attracted by her beauty, h
er fantastic, almost demoniacal, beauty-(I admit her beauty, of course).
   "Add to all this your nervous nature, your epilepsy, and your sudden arrival 
in a strange town-the day of meetings and of exciting scenes, the day of unexpec
ted acquaintanceships, the day of sudden actions, the day of meeting with the th
ree lovely Epanchin girls, and among them Aglaya-add your fatigue, your exciteme
nt; add Nastasia' s evening party, and the tone of that party, and-what were you
 to expect of yourself at such a moment as that?"
   "Yes, yes, yes!" said the prince, once more, nodding his head, and blushing s
lightly. "Yes, it was so, or nearly so-I know it.
   And besides, you see, I had not slept the night before, in the train, or the 
night before that, either, and I was very tired."
   "Of course, of course, quite so; that's what I am driving at!" continued Evge
nie, excitedly. "It is as clear as possible, and most comprehensible, that you, 
in your enthusiasm, should plunge headlong into the first chance that came of pu
blicly airing your great idea that you, a prince, and a pure-living man, did not
 consider a woman disgraced if the sin were not her own, but that of a disgustin
g social libertine! Oh, heavens! it's comprehensible enough, my dear prince, but
 that is not the question, unfortunately! The question is, was there any reality
 and truth in your feelings? Was it nature, or nothing but intellectual enthusia
sm? What do you think yourself? We are told, of course, that a far worse woman w
as FORGIVEN, but we don't find that she was told that she had done well, or that
 she was worthy of honour and respect! Did not your common-sense show you what w
as the real state of the case, a few months later? The question is now, not whet
her she is an innocent woman (I do not insist one way or the other-I do not wish
 to); but can her whole career justify such intolerable pride, such insolent, ra
pacious egotism as she has shown? Forgive me, I am too violent, perhaps, but-"
   "Yes-I dare say it is all as you say; I dare say you are quite right," mutter
ed the prince once more. "She is very sensitive and easily put out, of course; b
ut still, she"
   "She is worthy of sympathy? Is that what you wished to say, my good fellow? B
ut then, for the mere sake of vindicating her worthiness of sympathy, you should
 not have insulted and offended a noble and generous girl in her presence! This 
is a terrible exaggeration of sympathy! How can you love a girl, and yet so humi
liate her as to throw her over for the sake of another woman, before the very ey
es of that other woman, when you have already made her a formal proposal of marr
iage? And you DID propose to her, you know; you did so before her parents and si
sters. Can you be an honest man, prince, if you act so? I ask you! And did you n
ot deceive that beautiful girl when you assured her of your love?"
   "Yes, you are quite right. Oh! I feel that I am very guilty!" said Muishkin, 
in deepest distress.
   "But as if that is enough!" cried Evgenie, indignantly. "As if it is enough s
imply to say: 'I know I am very guilty!' You are to blame, and yet you persevere
 in evil-doing. Where was your heart, I should like to know, your CHRISTIAN HEAR
T, all that time? Did she look as though she were suffering less, at that moment
? You saw her face-was she suffering less than the other woman? How could you se
e her suffering and allow it to continue? How could you?"
   "But I did not allow it," murmured the wretched prince.
   "How-what do you mean you didn't allow?"
   "Upon my word, I didn't! To this moment I don't know how it all happened. I-I
 ran after Aglaya Ivanovna, but Nastasia Philipovna fell down in a faint; and si
nce that day they won't let me see Aglaya-that's all I know."
   "It's all the same; you ought to have run after Aglaya though the other was f
ainting."
   "Yes, yes, I ought-but I couldn't! She would have died-she would have killed 
herself. You don't know her; and I should have told Aglaya everything afterwards
-but I see, Evgenie Pavlovitch, you don't know all. Tell me now, why am I not al
lowed to see Aglaya? I should have cleared it all up, you know. Neither of them 
kept to the real point, you see. I could never explain what I mean to you, but I
 think I could to Aglaya. Oh! my God, my God! You spoke just now of Aglaya's fac
e at the moment when she ran away. Oh, my God! I remember it! Come along, come a
long-quick!" He pulled at Evgenie's coat-sleeve nervously and excitedly, and ros
e from his chair.
   "Where to?"
   "Come to Aglaya-quick, quick!"
   "But I told you she is not at Pavlofsk. And what would be the use if she were
?"
   "Oh, she'll understand, she'll understand!" cried the prince, clasping his ha
nds. "She would understand that all this is not the point-not a bit the real poi
nt-it is quite foreign to the real question."
   "How can it be foreign? You ARE going to be married, are you not?
   Very well, then you are persisting in your course. ARE you going to marry her
 or not?"
   "Yes, I shall marry her-yes."
   "Then why is it 'not the point'?"
   "Oh, no, it is not the point, not a bit. It makes no difference, my marrying 
her-it means nothing."
   "How 'means nothing'? You are talking nonsense, my friend. You are marrying t
he woman you love in order to secure her happiness, and Aglaya sees and knows it
. How can you say that it's 'not the point'?"
   "Her happiness? Oh, no! I am only marrying her-well, because she wished it. I
t means nothing-it's all the same. She would certainly have died. I see now that
 that marriage with Rogojin was an insane idea. I understand all now that I did 
not understand before; and, do you know, when those two stood opposite to one an
other, I could not bear Nastasia Philipovna's face! You must know, Evgenie Pavlo
vitch, I have never told anyone before-not even Aglaya-that I cannot bear Nastas
ia Philipovna's face." (He lowered his voice mysteriously as he said this.) You 
described that evening at Nastasia Philipovna's (six months since) very accurate
ly just now; but there is one thing which you did not mention, and of which you 
took no account, because you do not know. I mean her FACE-I looked at her face, 
you see. Even in the morning when I saw her portrait, I felt that I could not BE
AR to look at it. Now, there's Vera Lebedeff, for instance, her eyes are quite d
ifferent, you know. I'm AFRAID of her face!" he added, with real alarm.
   "You are AFRAID of it?"
   "Yes-she's mad!" he whispered, growing pale.
   "Do you know this for certain?" asked Evgenie, with the greatest curiosity.
   "Yes, for certain-quite for certain, now! I have discovered it ABSOLUTELY for
 certain, these last few days."
   "What are you doing, then?" cried Evgenie, in horror. "You must be marrying h
er solely out of FEAR, then! I can't make head or tail of it, prince. Perhaps yo
u don't even love her?"
   "Oh, no; I love her with all my soul. Why, she is a child! She's a child now-
a real child. Oh! you know nothing about it at all, I see."
   "And are you assured, at the same time, that you love Aglaya too?"
   "Yes-yes-oh; yes!"
   "How so? Do you want to make out that you love them BOTH?"
   "Yes-yes-both! I do!"
   "Excuse me, prince, but think what you are saying! Recollect yourself!"
   "Without Aglaya-I-I MUST see Aglaya!-I shall die in my sleep very soon-I thou
ght I was dying in my sleep last night. Oh! if Aglaya only knew all-I mean reall
y, REALLY all! Because she must know ALL-that's the first condition towards unde
rstanding. Why cannot we ever know all about another, especially when that other
 has been guilty? But I don't know what I'm talking about-I'm so confused. You p
ained me so dreadfully. Surely-surely Aglaya has not the same expression now as 
she had at the moment when she ran away? Oh, yes! I am guilty and I know it-I kn
ow it! Probably I am in fault all round-I don't quite know how-but I am in fault
, no doubt. There is something else, but I cannot explain it to you, Evgenie Pav
lovitch. I have no words; but Aglaya will understand. I have always believed Agl
aya will understand-I am assured she will."
   "No, prince, she will not. Aglaya loved like a woman, like a human being, not
 like an abstract spirit. Do you know what, my poor prince? The most probable ex
planation of the matter is that you never loved either the one or the other in r
eality."
   "I don't know-perhaps you are right in much that you have said, Evgenie Pavlo
vitch. You are very wise, Evgenie Pavlovitch-oh! how my head is beginning to ach
e again! Come to her, quick-for God's sake, come!"
   "But I tell you she is not in Pavlofsk! She's in Colmina."
   "Oh, come to Colmina, then! Come-let us go at once!"
   "No-no, impossible!" said Evgenie, rising.
   "Look here-I'll write a letter-take a letter for me!"
   "No-no, prince; you must forgive me, but I can't undertake any such commissio
ns! I really can't."
   And so they parted.
   Evgenie Pavlovitch left the house with strange convictions. He, too, felt tha
t the prince must be out of his mind.
   "And what did he mean by that FACE-a face which he so fears, and yet so loves
? And meanwhile he really may die, as he says, without seeing Aglaya, and she wi
ll never know how devotedly he loves her! Ha, ha, ha! How does the fellow manage
 to love two of them? Two different kinds of love, I suppose! This is very inter
esting-poor idiot! What on earth will become of him now?"
      X.
   THE prince did not die before his wedding-either by day or night, as he had f
oretold that he might. Very probably he passed disturbed nights, and was afflict
ed with bad dreams; but, during the daytime, among his fellow-men, he seemed as 
kind as ever, and even contented; only a little thoughtful when alone.
   The wedding was hurried on. The day was fixed for exactly a week after Evgeni
e's visit to the prince. In the face of such haste as this, even the prince's be
st friends (if he had had any) would have felt the hopelessness of any attempt t
o save" the poor madman." Rumour said that in the visit of Evgenie Pavlovitch wa
s to be discerned the influence of Lizabetha Prokofievna and her husband But if t
hose good souls, in the boundless kindness of their hearts, were desirous of sav
ing the eccentric young fellow from ruin, they were unable to take any stronger 
measures to attain that end. Neither their position, nor their private inclinati
on, perhaps (and only naturally), would allow them to use any more pronounced me
ans.
   We have observed before that even some of the prince's nearest neighbours had
 begun to oppose him. Vera Lebedeff's passive disagreement was limited to the sh
edding of a few solitary tears; to more frequent sitting alone at home, and to a
 diminished frequency in her visits to the prince's apartments.
   Colia was occupied with his father at this time. The old man died during a se
cond stroke, which took place just eight days after the first. The prince showed
 great sympathy in the grief of the family, and during the first days of their m
ourning he was at the house a great deal with Nina Alexandrovna. He went to the 
funeral, and it was observable that the public assembled in church greeted his a
rrival and departure with whisperings, and watched him closely.
   The same thing happened in the park and in the street, wherever he went. He w
as pointed out when he drove by, and he often overheard the name of Nastasia Phi
lipovna coupled with his own as he passed. People looked out for her at the fune
ral, too, but she was not there; and another conspicuous absentee was the captai
n's widow, whom Lebedeff had prevented from coming.
   The funeral service produced a great effect on the prince. He whispered to Le
bedeff that this was the first time he had ever heard a Russian funeral service 
since he was a little boy.
   Observing that he was looking about him uneasily, Lebedeff asked him whom he 
was seeking.
   "Nothing. I only thought I-"
   "Is it Rogojin?"
   "Why-is he here?"
   "Yes, he's in church."
   "I thought I caught sight of his eyes!" muttered the prince, in confusion. "B
ut what of it!-Why is he here? Was he asked?"
   "Oh, dear, no! Why, they don't even know him! Anyone can come in, you know. W
hy do you look so amazed? I often meet him; I've seen him at least four times, h
ere at Pavlofsk, within the last week."
   "I haven't seen him once-since that day!" the prince murmured.
   As Nastasia Philipovna had not said a word about having met Rogojin since "th
at day," the prince concluded that the latter had his own reasons for wishing to
 keep out of sight. All the day of the funeral our hero, was in a deeply thought
ful state, while Nastasia Philipovna was particularly merry, both in the daytime
 and in the evening.
   Colia had made it up with the prince before his father's death, and it was he
 who urged him to make use of Keller and Burdovsky, promising to answer himself 
for the former's behaviour. Nina Alexandrovna and Lebedeff tried to persuade him
 to have the wedding in St. Petersburg, instead of in the public fashion contemp
lated, down here at Pavlofsk in the height of the season.
   But the prince only said that Nastasia Philipovna desired to have it so, thou
gh he saw well enough what prompted their arguments.
   The next day Keller came to visit the prince. He was in a high state of delig
ht with the post of honour assigned to him at the wedding.
   Before entering he stopped on the threshold, raised his hand as if making a s
olemn vow, and cried:
   "I won't drink!"
   Then he went up to the prince, seized both his hands, shook them warmly, and 
declared that he had at first felt hostile towards the project of this marriage,
 and had openly said so in the billiard-rooms, but that the reason simply was th
at, with the impatience of a friend, he had hoped to see the prince marry at lea
st a Princess de Rohan or de Chabot; but that now he saw that the prince's way o
f thinking was ten times more noble than that of "all the rest put together." Fo
r he desired neither pomp nor wealth nor honour, but only the truth! The sympath
ies of exalted personages were well known, and the prince was too highly placed 
by his education, and so on, not to be in some sense an exalted personage!
   "But all the common herd judge 'differently; in the town, at the meetings, in
 the villas, at the band, in the inns and the billiard-rooms, the coming event h
as only to be mentioned and there are shouts and cries from everybody. I have ev
en heard talk of getting up a 'charivari' under the windows on the weddingnight.
 So if 'you have need of the pistol' of an honest man, prince, I am ready to fir
e half a dozen shots even before you rise from your nuptial couch!"
   Keller also advised, in anticipation of the crowd making a rush after the cer
emony, that a fire-hose should be placed at the entrance to the house; but Lebed
eff was opposed to this measure, which he said might result in the place being p
ulled down.
   "I assure you, prince, that Lebedeff is intriguing against you.
   He wants to put you under control. Imagine that! To take 'from you the use of
 your free-will and your money-that' is to say, the two things that distinguish 
us from the animals! I have heard it said positively. It is the sober truth."
   The prince recollected that somebody had told him something of the kind befor
e, and he had, of course, scoffed at it. He only laughed now, and forgot the hin
t at once.
   Lebedeff really had been busy for some little while; but, as usual, his plans
 had become too complex to succeed, through sheer excess of ardour. When he came
 to the prince-the very day before the wedding-to confess (for he always confess
ed to the persons against whom he intrigued, especially when the plan failed), h
e informed our hero that he himself was a born Talleyrand, but for some unknown 
reason had become simple Lebedeff. He then proceeded to explain his whole game t
o the prince, interesting the latter exceedingly.
   According to Lebedeff's account, he had first tried what he could do with Gen
eral Epanchin. The latter informed him that he wished well to the unfortunate yo
ung man, and would gladly do what he could to "save him," but that he did not th
ink it would be seemly for him to interfere in this matter. Lizabetha Prokofievn
a would neither hear nor see him. Prince S. and Evgenie Pavlovitch only shrugged
 their shoulders, and implied that it was no business of theirs. However, Lebede
ff had not lost heart, and went off to a clever lawyer,-a worthy and respectable
 man, whom he knew well.
   This old gentleman informed him that the thing was perfectly feasible if he c
ould get hold of competent witnesses as to Muishkin's mental incapacity. Then, w
ith the assistance of a few influential persons, he would soon see the matter ar
ranged.
   Lebedeff immediately procured the services of an old doctor, and carried the 
latter away to Pavlofsk to see the prince, by way of viewing the ground, as it w
ere, and to give him (Lebedeff) counsel as to whether the thing was to be done o
r not. The visit was not to be official, but merely friendly.
   Muishkin remembered the doctor's visit quite well. He remembered that Lebedef
f had said that he looked ill, and had better see a doctor; and although the pri
nce scouted the idea, Lebedeff had turned up almost immediately with his old fri
end, explaining that they had just met at the bedside of Hippolyte, who was very
 ill, and that the doctor had something to tell the prince about the sick man.
   The prince had, of course, at once received him, and had plunged into a conve
rsation about Hippolyte. He had given the doctor an account of Hippolyte's attem
pted suicide; and had proceeded thereafter to talk of his own malady,-of Switzer
land, of Schneider, and so on; and so deeply was the old man interested by the p
rince's conversation and his description of Schneider's system, that he sat on f
or two hours.
   Muishkin gave him excellent cigars to smoke, and Lebedeff, for his part, rega
led him with liqueurs, brought in by Vera, to whom the doctor-a married man and 
the father of a family-addressed such compliments that she was filled with indig
nation. They parted friends, and, after leaving the prince, the doctor said to L
ebedeff: "If all such people were put under restraint, there would be no one lef
t for keepers." Lebedeff then, in tragic tones, told of the approaching marriage
, whereupon the other nodded his head and replied that, after all, marriages lik
e that were not so rare; that he had heard that the lady was very fascinating an
d of extraordinary beauty, which was enough to explain the infatuation of a weal
thy man; that, further, thanks to the liberality of Totski and of Rogojin, she p
ossessed-so he had heard-not only money, but pearls, diamonds, shawls, and furni
ture, and consequently she could not be considered a bad match. In brief, it see
med to the doctor that the prince's choice, far from being a sign of foolishness
, denoted, on the contrary, a shrewd, calculating, and practical mind. Lebedeff 
had been much struck by this point of view, and he terminated his confession by 
assuring the prince that he was ready, if need be, to shed his very life's blood
 for him.
   Hippolyte, too, was a source of some distraction to the prince at this time; 
he would send for him at any and every hour of the day. They lived,-Hippolyte an
d his mother and the children,-in a small house not far off, and the little ones
 were happy, if only because they were able to escape from the invalid into the 
garden. The prince had enough to do in keeping the peace between the irritable H
ippolyte and his mother, and eventually the former became so malicious and sarca
stic on the subject of the approaching wedding, that Muishkin took offence at la
st, and refused to continue his visits.
   A couple of days later, however, Hippolyte's mother came with tears in her ey
es, and begged the prince to come back, "or HE would eat her up bodily." She add
ed that Hippolyte had a great secret to disclose. Of course the prince went. The
re was no secret, however, unless we reckon certain pantings and agitated glance
s around (probably all put on) as the invalid begged his visitor to "beware of R
ogojin."
   "He is the sort of man," he continued,. "who won't give up his object, you kn
ow; he is not like you and me, prince-he belongs to quite a different order of b
eings. If he sets his heart on a thing he won't be afraid of anything-" and so o
n.
   Hippolyte was very ill, and looked as though he could not long survive. He wa
s tearful at first, but grew more and more sarcastic and malicious as the interv
iew proceeded.
   The prince questioned him in detail as to his hints about Rogojin. He was anx
ious to seize upon some facts which might confirm Hippolyte's vague warnings; bu
t there were none; only Hippolyte's own private impressions and feelings.
   However, the invalid-to his immense satisfaction-ended by seriously alarming 
the prince.
   At first Muishkin had not cared to make any reply to his sundry questions, an
d only smiled in response to Hippolyte's advice to "run for his life-abroad, if 
necessary. There are Russian priests everywhere, and one can get married all ove
r the world."
   But it was Hippolyte's last idea which upset him.
   "What I am really alarmed about, though," he said, "is Aglaya Ivanovna. Rogoj
in knows how you love her. Love for love. You took Nastasia Philipovna from him.
 He will murder Aglaya Ivanovna; for though she is not yours, of course, now, st
ill such an act would pain you,-wouldn't it?"
   He had attained his end. The prince left the house beside himself with terror
.
   These warnings about Rogojin were expressed on the day before the wedding. Th
at evening the prince saw Nastasia Philipovna for the last time before they were
 to meet at the altar; but Nastasia was not in a position to give him any comfor
t or consolation. On the contrary, she only added to his mental perturbation as 
the evening went on. Up to this time she had invariably done her best to cheer h
im-she was afraid of his looking melancholy; she would try singing to him, and t
elling him every sort of funny story or reminiscence that she could recall. The 
prince nearly always pretended to be amused, whether he were so actually or no; 
but often enough he laughed sincerely, delighted by the brilliancy of her wit wh
en she was carried away by her narrative, as she very often was. Nastasia would 
be wild with joy to see the impression she had made, and to hear his laugh of re
al amusement; and she would remain the whole evening in a state of pride and hap
piness.
   But this evening her melancholy and thoughtfulness grew with every hour.
   The prince had told Evgenie Pavlovitch with perfect sincerity that he loved N
astasia Philipovna with all his soul. In his love for her there was the sort of 
tenderness one feels for a sick, unhappy child which cannot be left alone. He ne
ver spoke of his feelings for Nastasia to anyone, not even to herself. When they
 were together they never discussed their "feelings," and there was nothing in t
heir cheerful, animated conversation which an outsider could not have heard. Dar
ia Alexeyevna, with whom Nastasia was staying, told afterwards how she had been 
filled with joy and delight only to look at them, all this time.
   Thanks to the manner in which he regarded Nastasia's mental and moral conditi
on, the prince was to some extent freed from other perplexities. She was now qui
te different from the woman he had known three months before. He was not astonis
hed, for instance, to see her now so impatient to marry him-she who formerly had
 wept with rage and hurled curses and reproaches at him if he mentioned marriage
! "It shows that she no longer fears, as she did then, that she would make me un
happy by marrying me," he thought. And he felt sure that so sudden a change coul
d not be a natural one. This rapid growth of self-confidence could not be due on
ly to her hatred for Aglaya. To suppose that would be to suspect the depth of he
r feelings. Nor could it arise from dread of the fate that awaited her if she ma
rried Rogojin. These causes, indeed, as well as others, might have played a part
 in it, but the true reason, Muishkin decided, was the one he had long suspected
-that the poor sick soul had come to the end of its forces. Yet this was an expl
anation that did not procure him any peace of mind. At times he seemed to be mak
ing violent efforts to think of nothing, and one would have said that he looked 
on his marriage as an unimportant formality, and on his future happiness as a th
ing not worth considering. As to conversations such as the one held with Evgenie
 Pavlovitch, he avoided them as far as possible, feeling that there were certain
 objections to which he could make no answer.
   The prince had observed that Nastasia knew well enough what Aglaya was to him
. He never spoke of it, but he had seen her face when she had caught him startin
g off for the Epanchins' house on several occasions. When the Epanchins left Pav
lofsk, she had beamed with radiance and happiness. Unsuspicious and unobservant 
as he was, he had feared at that time that Nastasia might have some scheme in he
r mind for a scene or scandal which would drive Aglaya out of Pavlofsk. She had 
encouraged the rumours and excitement among the inhabitants of the place as to h
er marriage with the prince, in order to annoy her rival; and, finding it diffic
ult to meet the Epanchins anywhere, she had, on one occasion, taken him for a dr
ive past their house. He did not observe what was happening until they were almo
st passing the windows, when it was too late to do anything. He said nothing, bu
t for two days afterwards he was ill.
   Nastasia did not try that particular experiment again. A few days before that
 fixed for the wedding, she grew grave and thoughtful.
   She always ended by getting the better of her melancholy, and becoming merry 
and cheerful again, but not quite so unaffectedly happy as she had been some day
s earlier.
   The prince redoubled his attentive study of her symptoms. It was a most curio
us circumstance, in his opinion, that she never spoke of Rogojin. But once, abou
t five days before the wedding, when the prince was at home, a messenger arrived
 begging him to come at once, as Nastasia Philipovna was very ill.
   He had found her in a condition approaching to absolute madness.
   She screamed, and trembled, and cried out that Rogojin was hiding out there i
n the garden-that she had seen him herself-and that he would murder her in the n
ight-that he would cut her throat.
   She was terribly agitated all day. But it so happened that the prince called 
at Hippolyte's house later on, and heard from his mother that she had been in to
wn all day, and had there received a visit from Rogojin, who had made inquiries 
about Pavlofsk. On inquiry, it turned out that Rogojin visited the old lady in t
own at almost the same moment when Nastasia declared that she had seen him in th
e garden; so that the whole thing turned out to be an illusion on her part. Nast
asia immediately went across to Hippolyte's to inquire more accurately, and retu
rned immensely relieved and comforted.
   On the day before the wedding, the prince left Nastasia in a state of great a
nimation. Her wedding-dress and all sorts of finery had just arrived from town. 
Muishkin had not imagined that she would be so excited over it, but he praised e
verything, and his praise rendered her doubly happy.
   But Nastasia could not hide the cause of her intense interest in her wedding 
splendour. She had heard of the indignation in the town, and knew that some of t
he populace was getting up a sort of charivari with music, that verses had been 
composed for the occasion, and that the rest of Pavlofsk society more or less en
couraged these preparations. So, since attempts were being made to humiliate her
, she wanted to hold her head even higher than usual, and to overwhelm them all 
with the beauty and taste of her toilette. "Let them shout and whistle, if they 
dare!" Her eyes flashed at the thought. But, underneath this, she had another mo
tive, of which she did not speak. She thought that possibly Aglaya, or at any ra
te someone sent by her, would be present incognito at the ceremony, or in the cr
owd, and she wished to be prepared for this eventuality.
   The prince left her at eleven, full of these thoughts, and went home. But it 
was not twelve o'clock when a messenger came to say that Nastasia was very bad, 
and he must come at once.
   On hurrying back he found his bride locked up in her own room and could hear 
her hysterical cries and sobs. It was some time before she could be made to hear
 that the prince had come, and then she opened the door only just sufficiently t
o let him in, and immediately locked it behind him. She then fell on her knees a
t his feet. (So at least Dana Alexeyevna reported.) "What am I doing? What am I 
doing to you?" she sobbed convulsively, embracing his knees.
   The prince was a whole hour soothing and comforting her, and left her, at len
gth, pacified and composed. He sent another messenger during the night to inquir
e after her, and two more next morning.
   The last brought back a message that Nastasia was surrounded by a whole army 
of dressmakers and maids, and was as happy and as busy as such a beauty should b
e on her wedding morning, and that there was not a vestige of yesterday's agitat
ion remaining. The message concluded with the news that at the moment of the bea
rer's departure there was a great confabulation in progress as to which diamonds
 were to be worn, and how.
   This message entirely calmed the prince's mind.
   The following report of the proceedings on the wedding day may be depended up
on, as coming from eye-witnesses.
   The wedding was fixed for eight o'clock in the evening. Nastasia Philipovna w
as ready at seven. From six o'clock groups of people began to gather at Nastasia
's house, at the prince's, and at the church door, but more especially at the fo
rmer place. The church began to fill at seven.
   Colia and Vera Lebedeff were very anxious on the prince's account, but they w
ere so busy over the arrangements for receiving the guests after the wedding, th
at they had not much time for the indulgence of personal feelings.
   There were to be very few guests besides the best men and so on; only Dana Al
exeyevna, the Ptitsins, Gania, and the doctor. When the prince asked Lebedeff wh
y he had invited the doctor, who was almost a stranger, Lebedeff replied:
   "Why, he wears an 'order,' and it looks so well!"
   This idea amused the prince.
   Keller and Burdovsky looked wonderfully correct in their dresscoats and white
 kid gloves, although Keller caused the bridegroom some alarm by his undisguised
ly hostile glances at the gathering crowd of sight-seers outside.
   At about half-past seven the prince started for the church in his carriage.
   We may remark here that he seemed anxious not to omit a single one of the rec
ognized customs and traditions observed at weddings. He wished all to be done as
 openly as possible, and "in due order."
   Arrived at the church, Muishkin, under Keller's guidance, passed through the 
crowd of spectators, amid continuous whispering and excited exclamations. The pr
ince stayed near the altar, while Keller made off once more to fetch the bride.
   On reaching the gate of Daria Alexeyevna's house, Keller found a far denser c
rowd than he had encountered at the prince's. The remarks and exclamations of th
e spectators here were of so irritating a nature that Keller was very near makin
g them a speech on the impropriety of their conduct, but was luckily caught by B
urdovsky, in the act of turning to address them, and hurried indoors.
   Nastasia Philipovna was ready. She rose from her seat, looked into the glass 
and remarked, as Keller told the tale afterwards, that she was "as pale as a cor
pse." She then bent her head reverently, before the ikon in the corner, and left
 the room.
   A torrent of voices greeted her appearance at the front door. The crowd whist
led, clapped its hands, and laughed and shouted; but in a moment or two isolated
 voices were distinguishable.
   "What a beauty!" cried one.
   "Well, she isn't the first in the world, nor the last," said another.
   "Marriage covers everything," observed a third.
   "I defy you to find another beauty like that," said a fourth.
   "She's a real princess! I'd sell my soul for such a princess as that!"
   Nastasia came out of the house looking as white as any handkerchief; but her 
large dark eyes shone upon the vulgar crowd like blazing coals. The spectators' 
cries were redoubled, and became more exultant and triumphant every moment. The 
door of the carriage was open, and Keller had given his hand to the bride to hel
p her in, when suddenly with a loud cry she rushed from him, straight into the s
urging crowd. Her friends about her were stupefied with amazement; the crowd par
ted as she rushed through it, and suddenly, at a distance of five or six yards f
rom the carriage, appeared Rogojin. It was his look that had caught her eyes.
   Nastasia rushed to him like a madwoman, and seized both his hands.
   "Save me!" she cried. "Take me away, anywhere you like, quick!"
   Rogojin seized her in his arms and almost carried her to the carriage. Then, 
in a flash, he tore a hundred-rouble note out of his pocket and held it to the c
oachman.
   "To the station, quick! If you catch the train you shall have another. Quick!
"
   He leaped into the carriage after Nastasia and banged the door.
   The coachman did not hesitate a moment; he whipped up the horses, and they we
re oft.
   "One more second and I should have stopped him," said Keller, afterwards. In 
fact, he and Burdovsky jumped into another carriage and set off in pursuit; but 
it struck them as they drove along that it was not much use trying to bring Nast
asia back by force.
   "Besides," said Burdovsky," the prince would not like it, would he?" So they 
gave up the pursuit.
   Rogojin and Nastasia Philipovna reached the station just in time for the trai
n. As he jumped out of the carriage and was almost on the point of entering the 
train, Rogojin accosted a young girl standing on the platform and wearing an old
-fashioned, but respectable-looking, black cloak and a silk handkerchief over he
r head.
   "Take fifty roubles for your cloak?" he shouted, holding the money out to the
 girl. Before the astonished young woman could collect her scattered senses, he 
pushed the money into her hand, seized the mantle, and threw it and the handkerc
hief over Nastasia's head and shoulders. The latter's wedding-array would have a
ttracted too much attention, and it was not until some time later that the girl 
understood why her old cloak and kerchief had been bought at such a price.
   The news of what had happened reached the church with extraordinary rapidity.
 When Keller arrived, a host of people whom he did not know thronged around to a
sk him questions. There was much excited talking, and shaking of heads, even som
e laughter; but no one left the church, all being anxious to observe how the now
 celebrated bridegroom would take the news. He grew very pale upon hearing it, b
ut took it quite quietly.
   "I was afraid," he muttered, scarcely audibly, "but I hardly thought it would
 come to this." Then after a short silence, he added: "However, in her state, it
 is quite consistent with the natural order of things."
   Even Keller admitted afterwards that this was "extraordinarily philosophical"
 on the prince's part. He left the church quite calm, to all appearances, as man
y witnesses were found to declare afterwards. He seemed anxious to reach home an
d be left alone as quickly as possible; but this was not to be. He was accompani
ed by nearly all the invited guests, and besides this, the house was almost besi
eged by excited bands of people, who insisted upon being allowed to enter the ve
randah. The prince heard Keller and Lebedeff remonstrating and quarrelling with 
these unknown individuals, and soon went out himself. He approached the disturbe
rs of his peace, requested courteously to be told what was desired; then politel
y putting Lebedeff and Keller aside, he addressed an old gentleman who was stand
ing on the verandah steps at the head of the band of would-be guests, and courte
ously requested him to honour him with a visit. The old fellow was quite taken a
back by this, but entered, followed by a few more, who tried to appear at their 
ease. The rest remained outside, and presently the whole crowd was censuring tho
se who had accepted the invitation. The prince offered seats to his strange visi
tors, tea was served, and a general conversation sprang up. Everything was done 
most decorously, to the considerable surprise of the intruders. A few tentative 
attempts were made to turn the conversation to the events of the day, and a few 
indiscreet questions were asked; but Muishkin replied to everybody with such sim
plicity and good-humour, and at the same time with so much dignity, and showed s
uch confidence in the good breeding of his guests, that the indiscreet talkers w
ere quickly silenced. By degrees the conversation became almost serious. One gen
tleman suddenly exclaimed, with great vehemence: "Whatever happens, I shall not 
sell my property; I shall wait. Enterprise is better than money, and there, sir,
 you have my whole system of economy, if you wish!" He addressed the prince, who
 warmly commended his sentiments, though Lebedeff whispered in his ear that this
 gentleman, who talked so much of his "property," had never had either house or 
home.
   Nearly an hour passed thus, and when tea was over the visitors seemed to thin
k that it was time to go. As they went out, the doctor and the old gentleman bad
e Muishkin a warm farewell, and all the rest took their leave with hearty protes
tations of goodwill, dropping remarks to the effect that "it was no use worrying
," and that "perhaps all would turn out for the best," and so on. Some of the yo
unger intruders would have asked for champagne, but they were checked by the old
er ones. When all had departed, Keller leaned over to Lebedeff, and said:
   "With you and me there would have been a scene. We should have shouted and fo
ught, and called in the police. But he has simply made some new friends-and such
 friends, too! I know them!"
   Lebedeff, who was slightly intoxicated, answered with a sigh:
   "Things are hidden from the wise and prudent, and revealed unto babes. I have
 applied those words to him before, but now I add that God has preserved the bab
e himself from the abyss, He and all His saints."
   At last, about half-past ten, the prince was left alone. His head ached. Coli
a was the last to go, after having helped him to change his wedding clothes. The
y parted on affectionate terms, and, without speaking of what had happened, Coli
a promised to come very early the next day. He said later that the prince had gi
ven no hint of his intentions when they said good-bye, but had hidden them even 
from him. Soon there was hardly anyone left in the house. Burdovsky had gone to 
see Hippolyte; Keller and Lebedeff had wandered off together somewhere.
   Only Vera Lebedeff remained hurriedly rearranging the furniture in the rooms.
 As she left the verandah, she glanced at the prince. He was seated at the table
, with both elbows upon it, and his head resting on his hands. She approached hi
m, and touched his shoulder gently. The prince started and looked at her in perp
lexity; he seemed to be collecting his senses for a minute or so, before he coul
d remember where he was. As recollection dawned upon him, he became violently ag
itated. All he did, however, was to ask Vera very earnestly to knock at his door
 and awake him in time for the first train to Petersburg next morning. Vera prom
ised, and the prince entreated her not to tell anyone of his intention. She prom
ised this, too; and at last, when she had half-closed the door, be called her ba
ck a third time, took her hands in his, kissed them, then kissed her forehead, a
nd in a rather peculiar manner said to her, "Until tomorrow!"
   Such was Vera's story afterwards.
   She went away in great anxiety about him, but when she saw him in the morning
, he seemed to be quite himself again, greeted her with a smile, and told her th
at he would very likely be back by the evening. It appears that he did not consi
der it necessary to inform anyone excepting Vera of his departure for town.
      XI.
   AN hour later he was in St. Petersburg, and by ten o'clock he had rung the be
ll at Rogojin's.
   He had gone to the front door, and was kept waiting a long while before anyon
e came. At last the door of old Mrs. Rogojin's flat was opened, and an aged serv
ant appeared.
   "Parfen Semionovitch is not at home," she announced from the doorway. "Whom d
o you want?"
   "Parfen Semionovitch."
   "He is not in."
   The old woman examined the prince from head to foot with great curiosity.
   "At all events tell me whether he slept at home last night, and whether he ca
me alone?"
   The old woman continued to stare at him, but said nothing.
   "Was not Nastasia Philipovna here with him, yesterday evening?"
   "And, pray, who are you yourself?"
   "Prince Lef Nicolaievitch Muishkin; he knows me well."
   "He is not at home."
   The woman lowered her eyes.
   "And Nastasia Philipovna?"
   "I know nothing about it."
   "Stop a minute! When will he come back?"
   "I don't know that either."
   The door was shut with these words, and the old woman disappeared. The prince
 decided to come back within an hour. Passing out of the house, he met the porte
r.
   "Is Parfen Semionovitch at home?" he asked.
   "Yes."
   "Why did they tell me he was not at home, then?" "Where did they tell you so,
-at his door?" "No, at his mother's flat; I rang at Parfen Semionovitch's door a
nd nobody came."
   "Well, he may have gone out. I can't tell. Sometimes he takes the keys with h
im, and leaves the rooms empty for two or three days."
   "Do you know for certain that he was at home last night?"
   "Yes, he was."
   "Was Nastasia Philipovna with him?"
   "I don't know; she doesn't come often. I think I should have known if she had
 come."
   The prince went out deep in thought, and walked up and down the pavement for 
some time. The windows of all the rooms occupied by Rogojin were closed, those o
f his mother's apartments were open.
   It was a hot, bright day. The prince crossed the road in order to have a good
 look at the windows again; not only were Rogojin's closed, but the white blinds
 were all down as well.
   He stood there for a minute and then, suddenly and strangely enough, it seeme
d to him that a little corner of one of the blinds was lifted, and Rogojin's fac
e appeared for an instant and then vanished. He waited another minute, and decid
ed to go and ring the bell once more; however, he thought better of it again and
 put it off for an hour.
   The chief object in his mind at this moment was to get as quickly as he could
 to Nastasia Philipovna's lodging. He remembered that, not long since, when she 
had left Pavlofsk at his request, he had begged her to put up in town at the hou
se of a respectable widow, who had well-furnished rooms to let, near the Ismailo
fsky barracks. Probably Nastasia had kept the rooms when she came down to Pavlof
sk this last time; and most likely she would have spent the night in them, Rogoj
in having taken her straight there from the station.
   The prince took a droshky. It struck him as he drove on that he ought to have
 begun by coming here, since it was most improbable that Rogojin should have tak
en Nastasia to his own house last night. He remembered that the porter said she 
very rarely came at all, so that it was still less likely that she would have go
ne there so late at night.
   Vainly trying to comfort himself with these reflections, the prince reached t
he Ismailofsky barracks more dead than alive.
   To his consternation the good people at the lodgings had not only heard nothi
ng of Nastasia, but all came out to look at him as if he were a marvel of some s
ort. The whole family, of all ages, surrounded him, and he was begged to enter. 
He guessed at once that they knew perfectly well who he was, and that yesterday 
ought to have been his wedding-day; and further that they were dying to ask abou
t the wedding, and especially about why he should be here now, inquiring for the
 woman who in all reasonable human probability might have been expected to be wi
th him in Pavlofsk.
   He satisfied their curiosity, in as few words as possible, with regard to the
 wedding, but their exclamations and sighs were so numerous and sincere that he 
was obliged to tell the whole story-in a short form, of course. The advice of al
l these agitated ladies was that the prince should go at once and knock at Rogoj
in's until he was let in: and when let in insist upon a substantial explanation 
of everything. If Rogojin was really not at home, the prince was advised to go t
o a certain house, the address of which was given, where lived a German lady, a 
friend of Nastasia Philipovna's. It was possible that she might have spent the n
ight there in her anxiety to conceal herself.
   The prince rose from his seat in a condition of mental collapse.
   The good ladies reported afterwards that "his pallor was terrible to see, and
 his legs seemed to give way underneath him." With difficulty he was made to und
erstand that his new friends would be glad of his address, in order to act with 
him if possible.
   After a moment's thought he gave the address of the small hotel, on the stair
s of which he had had a fit some five weeks since. He then set off once more for
 Rogojin's.
   This time they neither opened the door at Rogojin's flat nor at the one oppos
ite. The prince found the porter with difficulty, but when found, the man would 
hardly look at him or answer his questions, pretending to be busy. Eventually, h
owever, he was persuaded to reply so far as to state that Rogojin had left the h
ouse early in the morning and gone to Pavlofsk, and that he would not return tod
ay at all.
   "I shall wait; he may come back this evening."
   "He may not be home for a week."
   "Then, at all events, he DID sleep here, did he?"
   "Well-he did sleep here, yes."
   All this was suspicious and unsatisfactory. Very likely the porter had receiv
ed new instructions during the interval of the prince's absence; his manner was 
so different now. He had been obliging-now he was as obstinate and silent as a m
ule. However, the prince decided to call again in a couple of hours, and after t
hat to watch the house, in case of need. His hope was that he might yet find Nas
tasia at the address which he had just received. To that address he now set off 
at full speed.
   But alas! at the German lady's house they did not even appear to understand w
hat he wanted. After a while, by means of certain hints, he was able to gather t
hat Nastasia must have had a quarrel with her friend two or three weeks ago, sin
ce which date the latter had neither heard nor seen anything of her. He was give
n to understand that the subject of Nastasia's present whereabouts was not of th
e slightest interest to her; and that Nastasia might marry all the princes in th
e world for all she cared! So Muishkin took his leave hurriedly. It struck him n
ow that she might have gone away to Moscow just as she had done the last time, a
nd that Rogojin had perhaps gone after her, or even WITH her. If only he could f
ind some trace!
   However, he must take his room at the hotel; and he started off in that direc
tion. Having engaged his room, he was asked by the waiter whether he would take 
dinner; replying mechanically in the affirmative, he sat down and waited; but it
 was not long before it struck him that dining would delay him. Enraged at this 
idea, he started up, crossed the dark passage (which filled him with horrible im
pressions and gloomy forebodings), and set out once more for Rogojin's. Rogojin 
had not returned, and no one came to the door. He rang at the old lady's door op
posite, and was informed that Parfen Semionovitch would not return for three day
s. The curiosity with which the old servant stared at him again impressed the pr
ince disagreeably. He could not find the porter this time at all.
   As before, he crossed the street and watched the windows from the other side,
 walking up and down in anguish of soul for half an hour or so in the stifling h
eat. Nothing stirred; the blinds were motionless; indeed, the prince began to th
ink that the apparition of Rogojin's face could have been nothing but fancy. Soo
thed by this thought, he drove off once more to his friends at the Ismailofsky b
arracks. He was expected there. The mother had already been to three or four pla
ces to look for Nastasia, but had not found a trace of any kind.
   The prince said nothing, but entered the room, sat down silently, and stared 
at them, one after the other, with the air of a man who cannot understand what i
s being said to him. It was strange-one moment he seemed to be so observant, the
 next so absent; his behaviour struck all the family as most remarkable. At leng
th he rose from his seat, and begged to be shown Nastasia's rooms. The ladies re
ported afterwards how he had examined everything in the apartments. He observed 
an open book on the table, Madam Bovary, and requested the leave of the lady of 
the house to take it with him. He had turned down the leaf at the open page, and
 pocketed it before they could explain that it was a library book. He had then s
eated himself by the open window, and seeing a card-table, he asked who played c
ards.
   He was informed that Nastasia used to play with Rogojin every evening, either
 at "preference" or "little fool," or "whist"; that this had been their practice
 since her last return from Pavlofsk; that she had taken to this amusement becau
se she did not like to see Rogojin sitting silent and dull for whole evenings at
 a time; that the day after Nastasia had made a remark to this effect, Rogojin h
ad whipped a pack of cards out of his pocket. Nastasia had laughed, but soon the
y began playing. The prince asked where were the cards, but was told that Rogoji
n used to bring a new pack every day, and always carried it away in his pocket.
   The good ladies recommended the prince to try knocking at Rogojin's once more
-not at once, but in the evening Meanwhile, the mother would go to Pavlofsk to i
nquire at Dana Alexeyevna's whether anything had been heard of Nastasia there. T
he prince was to come back at ten o'clock and meet her, to hear her news and arr
ange plans for the morrow.
   In spite of the kindly-meant consolations of his new friends, the prince walk
ed to his hotel in inexpressible anguish of spirit, through the hot, dusty stree
ts, aimlessly staring at the faces of those who passed him. Arrived at his desti
nation, he determined to rest awhile in his room before be started for Rogojin's
 once more. He sat down, rested his elbows on the table and his head on his hand
s, and fell to thinking.
   Heaven knows how long and upon what subjects he thought. He thought of many t
hings-of Vera Lebedeff, and of her father; of Hippolyte; of Rogojin himself, fir
st at the funeral, then as he had met him in the park, then, suddenly, as they h
ad met in this very passage, outside, when Rogojin had watched in the darkness a
nd awaited him with uplifted knife. The prince remembered his enemy's eyes as th
ey had glared at him in the darkness. He shuddered, as a sudden idea struck him.
   This idea was, that if Rogojin were in Petersburg, though he might hide for a
 time, yet he was quite sure to come to him-the prince-before long, with either 
good or evil intentions, but probably with the same intention as on that other o
ccasion. At all events, if Rogojin were to come at all he would be sure to seek 
the prince here-he had no other town address-perhaps in this same corridor; he m
ight well seek him here if he needed him. And perhaps he did need him. This idea
 seemed quite natural to the prince, though he could not have explained why he s
hould so suddenly have become necessary to Rogojin. Rogojin would not come if al
l were well with him, that was part of the thought; he would come if all were no
t well; and certainly, undoubtedly, all would not be well with him. The prince c
ould not bear this new idea; he took his hat and rushed out towards the street. 
It was almost dark in the passage.
   "What if he were to come out of that corner as I go by and-and stop me?" thou
ght the prince, as he approached the familiar spot.
   But no one came out.
   He passed under the gateway and into the street. The crowds of people walking
 about-as is always the case at sunset in Petersburg, during the summer-surprise
d him, but he walked on in the direction of Rogojin's house.
   About fifty yards from the hotel, at the first cross-road, as he passed throu
gh the crowd of foot-passengers sauntering along, someone touched his shoulder, 
and said in a whisper into his ear:
   "Lef Nicolaievitch, my friend, come along with me." It was Rogojin.
   The prince immediately began to tell him, eagerly and joyfully, how he had bu
t the moment before expected to see him in the dark passage of the hotel.
   "I was there," said Rogojin, unexpectedly. "Come along." The prince was surpr
ised at this answer; but his astonishment increased a couple of minutes afterwar
ds, when he began to consider it. Having thought it over, he glanced at Rogojin 
in alarm. The latter was striding along a yard or so ahead, looking straight in 
front of him, and mechanically making way for anyone he met.
   "Why did you not ask for me at my room if you were in the hotel?" asked the p
rince, suddenly.
   Rogojin stopped and looked at him; then reflected, and replied as though he h
ad not heard the question:
   "Look here, Lef Nicolaievitch, you go straight on to the house; I shall walk 
on the other side. See that we keep together."
   So saying, Rogojin crossed the road.
   Arrived on the opposite pavement, he looked back to see whether the prince we
re moving, waved his hand in the direction of the Gorohovaya, and strode on, loo
king across every moment to see whether Muishkin understood his instructions. Th
e prince supposed that Rogojin desired to look out for someone whom he was afrai
d to miss; but if so, why had he not told HIM whom to look out for?
   So the two proceeded for half a mile or so. Suddenly the prince began to trem
ble from some unknown cause. He could not bear it, and signalled to Rogojin acro
ss the road.
   The latter came at once.
   "Is Nastasia Philipovna at your house?"
   "Yes."
   "And was it you looked out of the window under the blind this morning?"
   "Yes."
   "Then why did-"
   But the prince could not finish his question; he did not know what to say. Be
sides this, his heart was beating so that he found it difficult to speak at all.
 Rogojin was silent also and looked at him as before, with an expression of deep
 thoughtfulness.
   "Well, I'm going," he said, at last, preparing to recross the road. "You go a
long here as before; we will keep to different sides of the road; it's better so
, you'll see."
   When they reached the Gorohovaya, and came near the house, the prince's legs 
were trembling so that he could hardly walk. It was about ten o'clock. The old l
ady's windows were open, as before;
   Rogojin's were all shut, and in the darkness the white blinds showed whiter t
han ever. Rogojin and the prince each approached the house on his respective sid
e of the road; Rogojin, who was on the near side, beckoned the prince across. He
 went over to the doorway.
   "Even the porter does not know that I have come home now. I told him, and tol
d them at my mother's too, that I was off to Pavlofsk," said Rogojin, with a cun
ning and almost satisfied smile. "We'll go in quietly and nobody will hear us."
   He had the key in his hand. Mounting the staircase he turned and signalled to
 the prince to go more softly; he opened the door very quietly, let the prince i
n, followed him, locked the door behind him, and put the key in his pocket.
   "Come along," he whispered.
   He had spoken in a whisper all the way. In spite of his apparent outward comp
osure, he was evidently in a state of great mental agitation. Arrived in a large
 salon, next to the study, he went to the window and cautiously beckoned the pri
nce up to him.
   "When you rang the bell this morning I thought it must be you. I went to the 
door on tip-toe and heard you talking to the servant opposite. I had told her be
fore that if anyone came and rang-especially you, and I gave her your name-she w
as not to tell about me. Then I thought, what if he goes and stands opposite and
 looks up, or waits about to watch the house? So I came to this very window, loo
ked out, and there you were staring straight at me. That's how it came about."
   "Where is Nastasia Philipovna?" asked the prince, breathlessly.
   "She's here," replied Rogojin, slowly, after a slight pause.
   "Where?"
   Rogojin raised his eyes and gazed intently at the prince.
   "Come," he said.
   He continued to speak in a whisper, very deliberately as before, and looked s
trangely thoughtful and dreamy. Even while he told the story of how he had peepe
d through the blind, he gave the impression of wishing to say something else. Th
ey entered the study. In this room some changes had taken place since the prince
 last saw it. It was now divided into two equal parts by a heavy green silk curt
ain stretched across it, separating the alcove beyond, where stood Rogojin's bed
, from the rest of the room.
   The heavy curtain was drawn now, and it was very dark. The bright Petersburg 
summer nights were already beginning to close in, and but for the full moon, it 
would have been difficult to distinguish anything in Rogojin's dismal room, with
 the drawn blinds. They could just see one anothers faces, however, though not i
n detail. Rogojin's face was white, as usual. His glittering eyes watched the pr
ince with an intent stare.
   "Had you not better light a candle?" said Muishkin.
   "No, I needn't," replied Rogojin, and taking the other by the hand he drew hi
m down to a chair. He himself took a chair opposite and drew it up so close that
 he almost pressed against the prince's knees. At their side was a little round 
table.
   Sit down," said Rogojin; "let's rest a bit." There was silence for a moment.
   "I knew you would be at that hotel," he continued, just as men sometimes comm
ence a serious conversation by discussing any outside subject before leading up 
to the main point. "As I entered the passage it struck me that perhaps you were 
sitting and waiting for me, just as I was waiting for you. Have you been to the 
old lady at Ismailofsky barracks?"
   "Yes," said the prince, squeezing the word out with difficulty owing to the d
readful beating of his heart.
   "I thought you would. 'They'll talk about it,' I thought; so I determined to 
go and fetch you to spend the night here-'We will be together,' I thought, 'for 
this one night-'"
   "Rogojin, WHERE is Nastasia Philipovna?" said the prince, suddenly rising fro
m his seat. He was quaking in all his limbs, and his words came in a scarcely au
dible whisper. Rogojin rose also.
   "There," he whispered, nodding his head towards the curtain.
   "Asleep?" whispered the prince.
   Rogojin looked intently at him again, as before.
   "Let's go in-but you mustn't-well-let's go in."
   He lifted the curtain, paused-and turned to the prince. "Go in," he said, mot
ioning him to pass behind the curtain. Muishkin went in.
   It's so dark," he said.
   "You can see quite enough," muttered Rogojin.
   "I can just see there's a bed-"
   "Go nearer," suggested Rogojin, softly.
   The prince took a step forward-then another-and paused. He stood and stared f
or a minute or two.
   Neither of the men spoke a word while at the bedside. The prince's heart beat
 so loud that its knocking seemed to be distinctly audible in the deathly silenc
e.
   But now his eyes had become so far accustomed to the darkness that he could d
istinguish the whole of the bed. Someone was asleep upon it-in an absolutely mot
ionless sleep. Not the slightest movement was perceptible, not the faintest brea
thing could be heard. The sleeper was covered with a white sheet; the outline of
 the limbs was hardly distinguishable. He could only just make out that a human 
being lay outstretched there.
   All around, on the bed, on a chair beside it, on the floor, were scattered th
e different portions of a magnificent white silk dress, bits of lace, ribbons an
d flowers. On a small table at the bedside glittered a mass of diamonds, torn of
f and thrown down anyhow. From under a heap of lace at the end of the bed peeped
 a small white foot, which looked as though it had been chiselled out of marble;
 it was terribly still.
   The prince gazed and gazed, and felt that the more he gazed the more death-li
ke became the silence. Suddenly a fly awoke somewhere, buzzed across the room, a
nd settled on the pillow. The prince shuddered.
   "Let's go," said Rogojin, touching his shoulder. They left the alcove and sat
 down in the two chairs they had occupied before, opposite to one another. The p
rince trembled more and more violently, and never took his questioning eyes off 
Rogojin's face.
   "I see you are shuddering, Lef Nicolaievitch," said the latter, at length, "a
lmost as you did once in Moscow, before your fit; don't you remember? I don't kn
ow what I shall do with you-"
   The prince bent forward to listen, putting all the strain he could muster upo
n his understanding in order to take in what Rogojin said, and continuing to gaz
e at the latter's face.
   "Was it you?" he muttered, at last, motioning with his head towards the curta
in.
   "Yes, it was I," whispered Rogojin, looking down.
   Neither spoke for five minutes.
   "Because, you know," Rogojin recommenced, as though continuing a former sente
nce, "if you were ill now, or had a fit, or screamed, or anything, they might he
ar it in the yard, or even in the street, and guess that someone was passing the
 night in the house. They would all come and knock and want to come in, because 
they know I am not at home. I didn't light a candle for the same reason. When I 
am not here-for two or three days at a time, now and then-no one comes in to tid
y the house or anything; those are my orders. So that I want them to not know we
 are spending the night here-"
   "Wait," interrupted the prince. "I asked both the porter and the woman whethe
r Nastasia Philipovna had spent last night in the house; so they knew-"
   "I know you asked. I told them that she had called in for ten minutes, and th
en gone straight back to Pavlofsk. No one knows she slept here. Last night we ca
me in just as carefully as you and I did today. I thought as I came along with h
er that she would not like to creep in so secretly, but I was quite wrong.
   She whispered, and walked on tip-toe; she carried her skirt over her arm, so 
that it shouldn't rustle, and she held up her finger at me on the stairs, so tha
t I shouldn't make a noise-it was you she was afraid of. She was mad with terror
 in the train, and she begged me to bring her to this house. I thought of taking
 her to her rooms at the Ismailofsky barracks first; but she wouldn't hear of it
. She said, 'No-not there; he'll find me out at once there. Take me to your own 
house, where you can hide me, and tomorrow we'll set off for Moscow.' Thence she
 would go to Orel, she said. When she went to bed, she was still talking about g
oing to Orel."
   "Wait! What do you intend to do now, Parfen?"
   "Well, I'm afraid of you. You shudder and tremble so. We'll pass the night he
re together. There are no other beds besides that one; but I've thought how we'l
l manage. I'll take the cushions off all the sofas, and lay them down on the flo
or, up against the curtain here-for you and me-so that we shall be together. For
 if they come in and look about now, you know, they'll find her, and carry her a
way, and they'll be asking me questions, and I shall say I did it, and then they
'll take me away, too, don't you see?
   So let her lie close to us-close to you and me.
   "Yes, yes," agreed the prince, warmly.
   "So we will not say anything about it, or let them take her away?"
   "Not for anything!" cried the other; "no, no, no!"
   "So I had decided, my friend; not to give her up to anyone," continued Rogoji
n. "We'll be very quiet. I have only been out of the house one hour all day, all
 the rest of the time I have been with her. I dare say the air is very bad here.
 It is so hot. Do you find it bad?"
   "I don't know-perhaps-by morning it will be."
   "I've covered her with oil-cloth-best American oilcloth, and put the sheet ov
er that, and four jars of disinfectant, on account of the smell-as they did at M
oscow-you remember? And she's lying so still; you shall see, in the morning, whe
n it's light. What! can't you get up?" asked Rogojin, seeing the other was tremb
ling so that he could not rise from his seat.
   "My legs won't move," said the prince; "it's fear, I know. When my fear is ov
er, I'll get up-"
   "Wait a bit-I'll make the bed, and you can lie down. I'll lie down, too, and 
we'll listen and watch, for I don't know yet what I shall do I tell you beforehan
d, so that you may be ready in case I-"
   Muttering these disconnected words, Rogojin began to make up the beds. It was
 clear that he had devised these beds long before; last night he slept on the so
fa. But there was no room for two on the sofa, and he seemed anxious that he and
 the prince should be close to one another; therefore, he now dragged cushions o
f all sizes and shapes from the sofas, and made a sort of bed of them close by t
he curtain. He then approached the prince, and gently helped him to rise, and le
d him towards the bed. But the prince could now walk by himself, so that his fea
r must have passed; for all that, however, he continued to shudder.
   "It's hot weather, you see," continued Rogojin, as he lay down on the cushion
s beside Muishkin, "and, naturally, there will be a smell. I daren't open the wi
ndow. My mother has some beautiful flowers in pots; they have a delicious scent;
 I thought of fetching them in, but that old servant will find out, she's very i
nquisitive.
   "Yes, she is inquisitive," assented the prince.
   "I thought of buying flowers, and putting them all round her; but I was afrai
d it would make us sad to see her with flowers round her."
   "Look here," said the prince; he was bewildered, and his brain wandered. He s
eemed to be continually groping for the questions he wished to ask, and then los
ing them. "Listen-tell me-how did you-with a knife?-That same one?"
   "Yes, that same one."
   "Wait a minute, I want to ask you something else, Parfen; all sorts of things
; but tell me first, did you intend to kill her before my wedding, at the church
 door, with your knife?"
   "I don't know whether I did or not," said Rogojin, drily, seeming to be a lit
tle astonished at the question, and not quite taking it in.
   "Did you never take your knife to Pavlofsk with you?" "No. As to the knife," 
he added, "this is all I can tell you about it." He was silent for a moment, and
 then said, "I took it out of the locked drawer this morning about three, for it
 was in the early morning all this-happened. It has been inside the book ever si
nce-and-and-this is what is such a marvel to me, the knife only went in a couple
 of inches at most, just under her left breast, and there wasn't more than half 
a tablespoonful of blood altogether, not more."
   "Yes-yes-yes-" The prince jumped up in extraordinary agitation. "I know, I kn
ow, I've read of that sort of thing-it's internal haemorrhage, you know. Sometim
es there isn't a drop-if the blow goes straight to the heart-"
   "Wait-listen!" cried Rogojin, suddenly, starting up. "Somebody's walking abou
t, do you hear? In the hall." Both sat up to listen.
   "I hear," said the prince in a whisper, his eyes fixed on Rogojin.
   "Footsteps?"
   "Yes."
   "Shall we shut the door, and lock it, or not?"
   "Yes, lock it."
   They locked the door, and both lay down again. There was a long silence.
   "Yes, by-the-by," whispered the prince, hurriedly and excitedly as before, as
 though he had just seized hold of an idea and was afraid of losing it again. "I
-I wanted those cards! They say you played cards with her?"
   "Yes, I played with her," said Rogojin, after a short silence.
   "Where are the cards?"
   "Here they are," said Rogojin, after a still longer pause.
   He pulled out a pack of cards, wrapped in a bit of paper, from his pocket, an
d handed them to the prince. The latter took them, with a sort of perplexity. A 
new, sad, helpless feeling weighed on his heart; he had suddenly realized that n
ot only at this moment, but for a long while, he had not been saying what he wan
ted to say, had not been acting as he wanted to act; and that these cards which 
he held in his hand, and which he had been so delighted to have at first, were n
ow of no use-no use He rose, and wrung his hands. Rogojin lay motionless, and see
med neither to hear nor see his movements; but his eyes blazed in the darkness, 
and were fixed in a wild stare.
   The prince sat down on a chair, and watched him in alarm. Half an hour went b
y.
   Suddenly Rogojin burst into a loud abrupt laugh, as though he had quite forgo
tten that they must speak in whispers.
   "That officer, eh!-that young officer-don't you remember that fellow at the b
and? Eh? Ha, ha, ha! Didn't she whip him smartly, eh?"
   The prince jumped up from his seat in renewed terror. When Rogojin quieted do
wn (which he did at once) the prince bent over him, sat down beside him, and wit
h painfully beating heart and still more painful breath, watched his face intent
ly. Rogojin never turned his head, and seemed to have forgotten all about him. T
he prince watched and waited. Time went on-it began to grow light.
   Rogojin began to wander-muttering disconnectedly; then he took to shouting an
d laughing. The prince stretched out a trembling hand and gently stroked his hai
r and his cheeks-he could do nothing more. His legs trembled again and he seemed
 to have lost the use of them. A new sensation came over him, filling his heart 
and soul with infinite anguish.
   Meanwhile the daylight grew full and strong; and at last the prince lay down,
 as though overcome by despair, and laid his face against the white, motionless 
face of Rogojin. His tears flowed on to Rogojin's cheek, though he was perhaps n
ot aware of them himself.
   At all events when, after many hours, the door was opened and people thronged
 in, they found the murderer unconscious and in a raging fever. The prince was s
itting by him, motionless, and each time that the sick man gave a laugh, or a sh
out, he hastened to pass his own trembling hand over his companion's hair and ch
eeks, as though trying to soothe and quiet him. But alas I he understood nothing
 of what was said to him, and recognized none of those who surrounded him.
   If Schneider himself had arrived then and seen his former pupil and patient, 
remembering the prince's condition during the first year in Switzerland, he woul
d have flung up his hands, despairingly, and cried, as he did then:
   "An idiot!"
      XII.
   WHEN the widow hurried away to Pavlofsk, she went straight to Daria Alexeyevn
a's house, and telling all she knew, threw her into a state of great alarm. Both
 ladies decided to communicate at once with Lebedeff, who, as the friend and lan
dlord of the prince, was also much agitated. Vera Lebedeff told all she knew, an
d by Lebedeff's advice it was decided that all three should go to Petersburg as 
quickly as possible, in order to avert "what might so easily happen."
   This is how it came about that at eleven o'clock next morning Rogojin's flat 
was opened by the police in the presence of Lebedeff, the two ladies, and Rogoji
n's own brother, who lived in the wing.
   The evidence of the porter went further than anything else towards the succes
s of Lebedeff in gaining the assistance of the police. He declared that he had s
een Rogojin return to the house last night, accompanied by a friend, and that bo
th had gone upstairs very secretly and cautiously. After this there was no hesit
ation about breaking open the door, since it could not be got open in any other 
way.
   Rogojin suffered from brain fever for two months. When he recovered from the 
attack he was at once brought up on trial for murder.
   He gave full, satisfactory, and direct evidence on every point; and the princ
e's name was, thanks to this, not brought into the proceedings. Rogojin was very
 quiet during the progress of the trial. He did not contradict his clever and el
oquent counsel, who argued that the brain fever, or inflammation of the brain, w
as the cause of the crime; clearly proving that this malady had existed long bef
ore the murder was perpetrated, and had been brought on by the sufferings of the
 accused.
   But Rogojin added no words of his own in confirmation of this view, and as be
fore, he recounted with marvellous exactness the details of his crime. He was co
nvicted, but with extenuating circumstances, and condemned to hard labour in Sib
eria for fifteen years. He heard his sentence grimly, silently, and thoughtfully
. His colossal fortune, with the exception of the comparatively small portion wa
sted in the first wanton period of his inheritance, went to his brother, to the 
great satisfaction of the latter.
   The old lady, Rogojin's mother, is still alive, and remembers her favourite s
on Parfen sometimes, but not clearly. God spared her the knowledge of this dread
ful calamity which had overtaken her house.
   Lebedeff, Keller, Gania, Ptitsin, and many other friends of ours continue to 
live as before. There is scarcely any change in them, so that there is no need t
o tell of their subsequent doings.
   Hippolyte died in great agitation, and rather sooner than he expected, about 
a fortnight after Nastasia Phiipovna's death.
   Colia was much affected by these events, and drew nearer to his mother in hea
rt and sympathy. Nina Alexandrovna is anxious, because he is "thoughtful beyond 
his years," but he will, we think, make a useful and active man.
   The prince's further fate was more or less decided by Colia, who selected, ou
t of all the persons he had met during the last six or seven months, Evgenie Pav
lovitch, as friend and confidant. To him he made over all that he knew as to the
 events above recorded, and as to the present condition of the prince. He was no
t far wrong in his choice. Evgenie Pavlovitch took the deepest interest in the f
ate of the unfortunate "idiot," and, thanks to his influence, the prince found h
imself once more with Dr.
   Schneider, in Switzerland.
   Evgenie Pavlovitch, who went abroad at this time, intending to live a long wh
ile on the continent, being, as he often said, quite superfluous in Russia, visi
ts his sick friend at Schneider's every few months.
   But Dr. Schneider frowns ever more and more and shakes his head; he hints tha
t the brain is fatally injured; he does not as yet declare that his patient is i
ncurable, but he allows himself to express the gravest fears.
   Evgenie takes this much to heart, and he has a heart, as is proved by the fac
t that he receives and even answers letters from Colia. But besides this, anothe
r trait in his character has become apparent, and as it is a good trait we will 
make haste to reveal it. After each visit to Schneider's establishment, Evgenie 
Pavlovitch writes another letter, besides that to Colia, giving the most minute 
particulars concerning the invalid's condition.
   In these letters is to be detected, and in each one more than the last, a gro
wing feeling of friendship and sympathy.
   The individual who corresponds thus with Evgenie Pavlovitch, and who engages 
so much of his attention and respect, is Vera Lebedeff. We have never been able 
to discover clearly how such relations sprang up. Of course the root of them was
 in the events which we have already recorded, and which so filled Vera with gri
ef on the prince's account that she fell seriously ill. But exactly how the acqu
aintance and friendship came about, we cannot say.
   We have spoken of these letters chiefly because in them is often to be found 
some news of the Epanchin family, and of Aglaya in particular. Evgenie Pavlovitc
h wrote of her from Paris, that after a short and sudden attachment to a certain
 Polish count, an exile, she had suddenly married him, quite against the wishes 
of her parents, though they had eventually given their consent through fear of a
 terrible scandal. Then, after a six months' silence, Evgenie Pavlovitch informe
d his correspondent, in a long letter, full of detail, that while paying his las
t visit to Dr.
   Schneider's establishment, he had there come across the whole Epanchin family
 (excepting the general, who had remained in St.
   Petersburg) and Prince S. The meeting was a strange one. They all received Ev
genie Pavlovitch with effusive delight; Adelaida and Alexandra were deeply grate
ful to him for his "angelic kindness to the unhappy prince."
   Lizabetha Prokofievna, when she saw poor Muishkin, in his enfeebled and humil
iated condition, had wept bitterly. Apparently all was forgiven him.
   Prince S. had made a few just and sensible remarks. It seemed to Evgenie Pavl
ovitch that there was not yet perfect harmony between Adelaida and her fiance, b
ut he thought that in time the impulsive young girl would let herself be guided 
by his reason and experience. Besides, the recent events that had befallen her f
amily had given Adelaida much to think about, especially the sad experiences of 
her younger sister. Within six months, everything that the family had dreaded fr
om the marriage with the Polish count had come to pass. He turned out to be neit
her count nor exile-at least, in the political sense of the word-but had had to 
leave his native land owing to some rather dubious affair of the past. It was hi
s noble patriotism, of which he made a great display, that had rendered him so i
nteresting in Aglaya's eyes.
   She was so fascinated that, even before marrying him, she joined a committee 
that had been organized abroad to work for the restoration of Poland; and furthe
r, she visited the confessional of a celebrated Jesuit priest, who made an absol
ute fanatic of her. The supposed fortune of the count had dwindled to a mere not
hing, although he had given almost irrefutable evidence of its existence to Liza
betha Prokofievna and Prince S.
   Besides this, before they had been married half a year, the count and his fri
end the priest managed to bring about a quarrel between Aglaya and her family, s
o that it was now several months since they had seen her. In a word, there was a
 great deal to say; but Mrs. Epanchin, and her daughters, and even Prince S., we
re still so much distressed by Aglaya's latest infatuations and adventures, that
 they did hot care to talk of them, though they must have known that Evgenie kne
w much of the story already.
   Poor Lizabetha Prokofievna was most anxious to get home, and, according to Ev
genie's account, she criticized everything foreign with much hostility.
   "They can't bake bread anywhere, decently; and they all freeze in their house
s, during winter, like a lot of mice in a cellar. At all events, I've had a good
 Russian cry over this poor fellow," she added, pointing to the prince, who had 
not recognized her in the slightest degree. "So enough of this nonsense; it's ti
me we faced the truth. All this continental life, all this Europe of yours, and 
all the trash about 'going abroad' is simply foolery, and it is mere foolery on 
our part to come. Remember what I say, my friend; you'll live to agree with me y
ourself."
   So spoke the good lady, almost angrily, as she took leave of Evgenie Pavlovit
ch.

      Copyright
This work is in the public domain at least in the United States. HOWEVER, copyright law varies in other countries, and the work may still be under copyright in the country from which you are. It is your responsibility to check the applicable copyright laws in your country before use this work.
